Title: The Lockhart papers: containing memoirs and commentaries upon the affairs of Scotland from 1702 to 1715, his secret correspondence with the son of King James the Second from 1718 to 1728, and his other political writings; also, journals and memoirs of the Young Pretender's expedition in 1745
Author(s): Lockhart, George


CONTAINING 

MEMOIRS and COMMENTARIES upon the Affairs of SCOTLAND from 
1 702 to 1 7 1 5, by GEORGE LOCKH ART, Esq. of CARNWATII, 

His SECRET CORRESPONDENCE with the Son of King JAMES the 
SECOND from 1718 to 1728, 

And his other political Writings; 

Also, JOURNALS and MEMOIRS of the Young PRETENDER'S Expe- 
dition in 1745, by Highland Officers in his Army. 

PUBLISHED FROM ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPTS 

IN THE POSSESSION OF 

ANTHONY AUFRERE, ESQ. 

OF HOVETON, NORFOLK. 
Celebrare domestica facta. 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. II. 



Pontoon : 




PRINTED BY BICHABD AND ARTHUR TAYLOR, SHOE-LANE, 

FOR WILLIAM ANDERSON, No. 186, PICCADILLY. 

1817. 












J/.xO I 



v, 













C ONTENTS 



OF 



THE SECOND VOLUME. 



A Page t 

REGISTER of Letters twixt the King and George Lockhart of 

Carnwath, containing also a short account of public affairs from 1716 

to 1728 . . . . . . . . 1 

State of affairs in Scotland ... .. . 4 

Lord Cadogan sent there as a check upon the Duke of Argyle . 5 

Situation and conduct of the Scots Tories .. .... .... 6 

They hope to engage the King of Sweden in their cause 7 

The Duke of Mar's application for money ; Lord Eglinton offers three 

thousand guineas .. .. .. 8 

Letter, 1st January 1718, from the King, at Rome, to Mr. Lockhart . . 9 

Mr. Lockhart's reply, 26th March 1718 .. .... ibid. 

The Duke of Argyle discontented with the Government .... 1 1 

Mr. Lockhart endeavours to bring him over to the King 12 

Conferences with their mutual friend Colonel Midleton . 13 

Captain Dougall Campbell, his character and death .... 14 
His account of letters written by the King, when at Perth, to the Duke 

of Argyle and Lord Isla, but never delivered . 15 

The Duke of Mar suspected of withholding certain matters from the 

King's knowledge .. .. .. 16 

Francis Kennedy sent to Scotland with tidings of a Spanish armament, 

under the Duke of Ormond, in the King's favour 17 

Earl Marishal lands, with some Spanish troops, in the Highlands; but 

the Duke of Ormond' s fleet is driven back by a storm 18 

Battle of Glenshiles; Highlanders disperse ; the Spaniards surrender 19 
Mr. Lockhart's instructions to Earl Marishal in case the enterprize had 

proceeded . .. ._ .... .... 20 



VI CONTENTS OP 

Fags. 

Anecdotes of Captain Straiten (the King's agent at Edinburgh), Viscount 

Stormont, and the Earl of Dalhousie . . 22 

Anecdotes of Colonel Guest .. .. 24 

Mr. Lockhart writes to his son at Rome to propose to the King the no- 
mination of certain persons in Scotland to manage his concerns there 26 

His son's answer, 20th February 1720 .. .> 27 

Letter, 15th February 1720, from the King to Mr. Lockhart 29 

Letter, more private, 17th ditto, from the same to the same 31 

Mr. Lockhart's reply .. .. .. 32 

The Duke of Argyle accepts a place under Government 34 

Death of the Bishop of Edinburgh ; its results among the Episcopalians 35 
Letter, 25th April 1720, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, upon Church 

affairs .. .. .. .. 36 

Letter, 12th June 1720, from the King to Bishop Fullerton . 38 

Letter, 12th June 1720, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, mentioning the 

Queen's pregnancy .. .. 39 

Letter, 2d July 1720, from the King to the College of Bishops at Edin- 
burgh .. .. .. .. 41 

The Dutchess of Perth conveys her sons to France . 42 

Letter, 2d August 1720, from Mr. Lockhart to Mr. Murray (in the King's 

service) on that occurrence .. .. ibid. 

Mr. Murray's answer, 20th September 1720 46 

Mr. Lockhart in letters to Mr. Murray, 22d December 1720, and 20th 
January 1721, refers to the divisions among the King's servants 
abroad and to the affairs of the Church ; gives an account of one An- 
tony Osburn, and mentions the jealousy of the Lords Tullibardine, 

Seaforth, &c. .. .. .. 47 

The King, 4th and 15th March 1721, replies to Mr. Lockhart's letters to 
Mr. Murray, and announces the birth of a son (Charles, the young 

Pretender) .. .. .. 53 

History of the Scots Peerage Bill .. .'.. 56 

The Earl of Sunderland, his conduct and views 57 

The Peerage Bill opposed and negatived by the House of Commons ibid. 

Reflections upon the conduct of the Scots Peejs on that occasion 58 

Letter, 15th June 1721, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, mentioning 
struggles at the election of a Scots Peer on\the death of the Marquis 
of Annandale negotiations between the Tories and the Duke of 
Argyle success of Lord Aberdeen character of the young Duke of 

Hamilton and of the Earl of Kincardine f -- 59 

The King's answer, 4th August 1721 .. .... 64 



THE SECOND VOLUME. VII 

Page. 
Anecdote of Captain Alexander Urquart .. .... .... 67 

Letter, 5th December 1721, from Mr. Lockhart to the King with an 
account of Captain Urquart's proposals in behalf of Lord Sunderland 
an interview with Mr. Shippen and indiscretion of the King's 

servants - - - - .. .... 68 

The King's answer, 31st January 1722 .. . 74 

Letter, 12th March 1722, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, concerning 
the nomination of Bishops and the union of certain Scots Peers 

against the Peerage Bill .. .. 77 

The King's answer, 9th May 1722 .. 81 

Whig Commoners in Scotland elected to the new Parliament 82 

Intrigues among the Scots Peers .. 83 

Address of the Barons, &c. of the shire of Edinburgh 84 

Letter, 23d April 1722, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, with a detail of 
proceedings at the election of Scots Peers the conduct of several 

and the high reputation of the Earl of Aberdeen . . 86 

The King's answer, 16th August 17-22 .. 90 

The Duke of Mar suspected of retaining money intended for the King 9 1 

Generosity of Mr. Lows of Merchiston .. 92 

Letter, 7th December 1722, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, upon Church 

affairs .. .- .- .- 93 

The King's answer, 5th April 1723 .. 98 

Letter, 2 1st May 1723, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, by desire of the 

Bishops .. .. .. .. 99 

Character and conduct of Gedderer, claiming to officiate as Bishop of 

Aberdeen .. .. .. .. 101 

The Jacobites exposed to difficulties, by the oath of abjuration 102 

Letter, 10th September 1723, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, upon the 
affairs of the Bishops the abjuration oath the conduct of Frazer 
(Lord Lovat) and doubts entertained of the Duke of Mar's fidelity 103 

The King's answer to Mr. Lockhart's letter of the 21st May 112 

Letter, 20th August 1723, from the King to the Bishops 113 

Letter, 24th November 1723, from the same, partly answering Mr. Lock- 
hart's letter of the 10th September . . 111 

Letter, 18th March 1724, from the same, by way of further reply and 

inclosing a letter to the Bishops .. 115 

Letter, 18th August 1724, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, concerning 

the Bishops the Duke of Mar and Captain Straiton 117 

Assembly of the Bishops debates and divisions .... 123 






CONTENTS OF 

Page. 

Letter, 8th December 1724, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, upon the 

affairs of the Bishops .- 128 

Letter, 31st August 1724, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, upon the af- 
fairs of Europe his negotiations with foreign Courts and his having 
withdrawn his confidence from the Duke of Mar 130 

Letter, 28th November 1724, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, in reply 
to the foregoing, and animadverting upon the conduct of the Earl 
of Kinnoul in deserting the King's party .... -.-*.. 132 

Great discontent in Scotland about the additional duty upon ale J-j-jfi^j; 134 

The Shire of Edinburgh petitions the House of Commons against it .. 135 

Letter concerning it from the heretors in Edinburghshire to their repre- 
sentative Robert Dundas, Lord Advocate 137 

Substance of a letter, 27th March 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King 
upon the above proceedings General Wade's visit to the High- 
lands and suspicions entertained of the Duke of Mar's treachery 141 

Letter, 27th October 1724, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, with a mes- 
sage for the Duke of Hamilton and mentioning the Queen's being 
again pregnant .. .- . 142 

Letter, same date, from the King to the Bishops 144 

Letter, 10th February 1725, from Colonel Hay to Mr. Lockhart, upon 

the state of affairs in Europe .. .... ibid. 

Letter, 8th April 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, mentioning the 

Duke of Mar's complaints of the Bishop of Rochester 145 

Letter, 10th March 1725, from Colonel Hay to Mr. Lockhart, that the 
King had declared him Secretary of State and Earl of Inverness 
and that the Queen was delivered of a second son (Henry after- 
wards styled Cardinal of York) .. 148 

Letter, 21st March 1725, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, upon the con- 
duct of the Duke of Mar and Lord Kinnoul ..... 150 

Letter, same date, from the same to the Bishops, recommending peace 

and unity .. .. .. . . 152 

Letter, 24th May 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, upon the designs 
of Government against the Highlanders the death of Captain Stra- 
ton and the wish that Captain Simon Frazer might replace him ibid. 

Conduct of Ministers towards the Argyle and Squadrone parties .... 1 56 

Anecdote of Mr. P. Haldane .. .. -i<ibiM 157 

Bill for disarming the Highlanders carried through by the influence e>f 

the Duke of Argyle and Mr. Duncan Forbes .... 159 

General Wade appointed Commander in Chief in Scotland .... 160 



THE SECOND VOLUMK. IX 

Pap.-. 

Camp formed at Inverness .. .. . . 161 

Disturbances at Glasgow Campbell of Shawfield's house destroyed, and 

his life threatened .. .. 162 

Proceedings "of General Wade and the Lord Advocate .. 163 

Conduct of the Lord President and Lord Advocate towards the Edin- 
burgh brewers .. .. .. . 165 

Letter, 23d June 1725, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, concerning the 
Duke of Mar and the Bishop of Rochester, and Captain Straton's 
H< death .. .. .. 169 

Letter, 13th July 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, mentioning a 
narrative sent to Scotland by the Duke of Mar in his justification-^ 
the disturbances at Glasgow the general discontent and the re- 
fusal of the M c Kenzies to give up their arms. 171 

Abstract of the Duke of Mar's narrative .. 175 

Remarks thereon and strictures upon the conduct of the Duke of Mar 

and Lord Inverness .. .. .. . .184 

Letter, 25th July 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, upon the senti- 
ments of the Highlanders danger of their declaring in his favour 
without other support Major Walkinshaw's complaints of the Duke 
of Mar and General Wade's visit to the Highlands 186 

Abstract of a letter from a Highland Chieftain at Paris to a friend in Scot- 
land, concerning the bill for disarming the Highlanders, and the 
conduct of the Bishop of Rochester towards the Chiefs of Clans, at 
Paris .. .. .. .. 192 

Letter, 2d September 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, with a mes- 
sage from the Duke of Hamilton .. 193 

Letter, same date, from the same to Lord Inverness upon the difficulties 
in their correspondence and the proposals made by several Clans to 
General Wade .. .. .. 196 

Letter, 4th August 1725, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart in reply 

to his of the 24th May .. .. 198 

Letter, 1st September 1725, from the King to Mr. Lockhart his opinion 
of the Duke of Mar's Narrative satisfaction with the Bishop of Ro- 
chester and intention of making James Murray a Scots Earl and 
governor of his eldest son .. .. 199 

Letter, 8th September 1725, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart, with 

observations upon the Duke of Mar's Narrative and conduct 201 

Letter, 10th September 1725, from Allan Cameron to Mr. Lockhart, ac- 
quainting him with his arrival in theHighlands . . 209 

Mr. Lockhart's answer, 5th October 1725 proposing to Mr. Cameron to 
VOL. n. b 



X CONTENTS OP 

Page. 

establish a correspondence between some leading Highlanders and 
the King's friends at Edinburgh and mentioning the strange but 
probable union between. the Highlanders and Cameronians 210 

Letter, 13th October 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King upon the 

arrival of A. Cameron and his correspondence with him 213 

Letter, same date, from the same to Lord Inverness mentioning the ar- 
rival, from France, of Mr. A. Seymour and David Nairn, their re- 
ports and opinions the trial of the Glasgow rioters ^and the lenity 
of the Lords Justiciary ... -. 214 

Letter, 26th October 1725, from Allan Cameron to Mr. Lockhart, ap- 
proving his proposal of a correspondence, and desiring an interview 216 

Letter, 27th October 1725, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart that 
no foreign assistance could be hoped for until the spring, and that in 
case of invasion, Edinburgh Castle should be secured for the King 218 

Reports publicly spread that the Queen had quitted the King and re- 
tired to a convent at Rome .. .. 220 

Allan Cameron arrives at Edinburgh and has frequent conferences with 

the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of Kincardine, and Mr. Lockhart 221 

Letter, 18th December 1725, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, with the 
opinions of some of his friends upon the attempt at invasion and 
their doubts of the Earl of Panmure's sincerity . 222 

Letter, same date, from the same to Lord Inverness that it would be 
difficult to secure Edinburgh Castle that General Wade was en- 
deavouring to gain the Highland Chieftains that Scotland was en- 
tirely governed by the Campbells that the Squadrone were a das- 
tardly set that the Duke of Mar's brother Lord Grange was expect- 
ed to be Lord President that the Bishop of Rochester was accused 
by the Duke of Mar's friendsof beingan enemy to Scotland and that 
Bishop Irvine being dead it was difficult to. find a proper successor 228 

Letter, 18th January 1726, from the same to the King, upon the conster- 
nation among his friends at the reports of divisions in the Royal fa- 
mily . . . . . . . . 232 

Letter, 25th January 1726, from the same to the same, containing a Me- 
morial concerning trade and war, and the advantage that would arise 
to the King if the Emperor of Germany would enable him to seize 
Hanover .. .. .. 231 

Letter, 31st January 1726, from the same to the same, upon Church af- 
fairs .. .. .. .. 236 

Remarks upon the grant of 6000^. to Campbell of Shavvfield for the injury 

done to his house by the Glasgow rioters .... .._. 240 



THE SECOND VOLOME. XI 

Page. 

Letter, 17th November 1725, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart with 

an account of the Queen's retiring to a convent . .... 241 

Memoire inclosed in the above letter, and by the King's order dispersed 

over Europe .. .. .. 243 

Letters from the King to the Queen .. .... 246 

Letter, 24th November 1725, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart, re- 
lative to the Queen's conduct and the King's views upon Scotland 251 

Letter, 8th December 1725, from the King to Mr. Lockhart that the 
Queen continued in the convent and that the Pope had interfered 
in her behalf, and objected to a Protestant governor for the young P. 253 

Letter, 19th January 1726, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart, con- 
cerning differences between the Bishop of Rochester and Murray 
'(lately made Earl of Dunbar) and the King's promotion of the 
order of St. Andrew .. .. . . 254 

Letter, same date, from the King to Mr. Lockhart that the Queen was 
still in the convent, and that he was made so uneasy by the Pope that 
he was anxious to quit the Papal territories . . 256 

Letter, 12th March 1726, from Mr. Lockhart to the King expressing 
his affliction at the divisions in the Royal family mentioning the se- 
vere reflections cast upon Lords Inverness and Dunbar and ear- 
nestly advising a reconciliation with the Queen .... .... 257 

Letter, same date, from the same to Lord Inverness upon the same sub- 
ject, and upon the conduct to be observed towards the Highlanders if 
the King should land in Scotland .. 259 

Letter, said to have been written by the Queen to her sister, declaring 
that the misbehaviour of Lord and Lady Inverness had forced her 
to retire to a convent .. .. .. . 265 

Letter, 2d February 1726, from the King to Mr. Lockhart his hopes of 
assistance from the Emperor and his desire that the Duke of Ha- 
milton and Mr. L. would meet at London a person to be sent over 
by the Emperor for information . . . 266 

Mr. Lockhart's reply, 3d April 1726 .. 267 

Letter, 2d April 1726, from Mr. Lockhart to the Duke of Hamilton at 
London, inclosing the King's last letter, and advising what course to 
pursue .. .. .. 268 

Letter, 30th April 1726, from the same to Lord Inverness, upon Church 

affairs and the conduct of the Duke of Wharton 270 

Letter, 2d March 1726, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, with copies of 
letters written by the King to a friend and to the Queen, and intended 

to be dispersed, in vindication of his conduct towards her 273 

b2 



XJ1 CONTENTS OF 

Letter, 22d May 1726, from Mr. Lockhart to the King in reply .... 270 

Reports concerning the Royal family, brought from Paris by Mr. Mon- 

creife .. .. .. 28O 

Letter, 1st May 1726, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart, with a bill 

for 50/. remitted by the King to T. S' Clare 281 

Letter, 9th June 1726, from Mr. Lockhart to Lord Inverness, acknow- 
ledging the preceding letter, and mentioning General Wade's con- 
duct to the leading Highlanders .. . ibid. 

Letter, 1st May 1726, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, acknowledging 
several letters delivered by A. Cameron and justifying the conduct 
of those about him to the Queen .. . 28* 

Letter, same date, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart, upon the sepa- 
ration between the King aud Queen .. .. . 287 

Letter, same date, from the King to the Bishops . . 289 

Letter, 7th July 1726, from Mr. Lockhart to the King upon the arrival 
of General Wade and the Duke of Argyle in Scotland-^-a law-suit 
between the Duke of Gordon and Lord Aboyne Lord Seaforth r s 
expected pardon and the affairs of the Church 29O 

Letter, 23d July 1726, from the same to the same entreating a recon- 
ciliation with the Queen, pointing out the bad consequences of de- 
laying it and observing upon the conduct of the Duke of Mar and 
Mr. Carnagy of Boisack .. 291 

Letter, 24th July 1726, from the same to Lord Inverness upon the re- 
ports to his disadvantage and advising him to repair the breach in 
the Royal family .. .. .. . 296 

Letter, 29th July 1726, from the same to the King that the Duke of 
Hamilton was returned from England, and had mentioned the dissa- 
tisfaction occasioned by the King's late promotion of the order of 
S' Andrew that Mr. Murray of Stanhope would be a proper person 
to correspond with in the Highlands and that Lord Seaforth's par- 
don was expected, by General Wade's advice 298 

Letter, 8th August 1720, from the same to the King that Mr. Murray 
declined corresponding and that General Wade was trying to 
gain the Jacobites .. .. .. . 301 

Letter, 20th July 1726, from Lord Inverness to Mr. Lockhart in vindi- 
cation of his conduct towards the Queen 303 

Letter, same date, from the same to the same, upon the affairs of Europe 

and Captain Frazer's correspondence with the Duke of Mar 305 

Letter, same date, from the King to the same about the Queen and the 

conduct of the Duke of Mar and Mr. Carnagy . . * . .... 308 



THE SECOND VOLUME. Xlll 

Page. 

Letter, 20th July 1726, from Lord Inverness to the same, with two letters 

from the King to the Bishops ._ .. . 309 

Letter, 9th September 1726, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, in reply to 
all his last and vindicating himself and Captain Frazer for writing 

to the Duke of Mar .. .. .. 311 

Letter, 10th September 1726, from the same to Lord Inverness, upon 
the same subject and inclosing a letter from four Scots Bishops to - 

the King .. .. .. 31 & 

Letter, 2d October 1726, from the same to the King that the Duke of 
Hamilton had gone over to the Government, received favours, and 

expected more .. .. .. 319' 

Letter, 24th August 1726, from the King to Mr. Lockhart upon the 
conduct of the Queen's advisers affairs of Europe and his inten- 
tion of going to Bologna .. .. 321 

Remarks upon the last letter suspicions that Lord Inverness acted im- 
properly . _ .. .. .. 322 

Affairs of and divisions in the Church .. 323 

Character and conduct of Bishop Miller . . 32 1 

The correspondence between the King and Mr. Lockhart, intercepted by 

Government .. .. .. 33O 

A messenger sent to arrest Mr. Lockhart and another . . 331 

Mr. Lockhart escapes to Durham and afterwards to Scotland 332 

Death of Fullerton bishop of Edinburgh, and consequent divisions 

among the Episcopal clergy .. .. . 333 

S ubstance of Mr. Lockhart's letters to Lord Inverness and the King upon 

his arrival at Rotterdam in April 1727 _ 335 

His interview at Brussells with Lord North and Gray 33ff 

Lord Inverness removed from the office of Secretary of State Sir John 
Graham appointed his successor Lord North and Gray disappoint- 
ed in his expectations on joining the King at Bologna enters the 

Spanish service .. .. .. 338 

Reflections upon the conduct of Lord and Lady Inverness and their ad- 
herents .. .. .. .. 339 

Letter, 20th May 1727, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, expressing his 

regret at the latter's suffering on his account 34t 

Letter, same date, from Lord Dunbar to the same 342 

Mr. Lockhart's sentiments of the true meaning of Lord Dunbar's letter 

and substance of his replies to the King and that Lord 343 

Letter, 14th June 1727, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, concerning 



XIV CONTENTS OF 

Page. 

Lord North and Gray continental affairs and his desire of corre- 
sponding with Lord Dundonald .. .. . 344 

Paper inclosed in the foregoing letter, being the King's justification of 

Lord Inverness, intended to be dispersed over Great Britain 346 

Character and conduct of James Hamilton, a creature of Lord Inverness 348 

Political occurrences in Europe .. .. 349 

Letter circulated upon the Continent, containing an extraordinary ac- 
count of and reason for the sudden death of King George the First 352 

Letter, 28th July 1727, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, upon the mode 
of corresponding with Lord Dundonald and the Duke of Mar's 
complaint of the King's ill usage of him . . 353 

The King hearing of the death of King George the First sets out for 

Lorrain .. .. .. .- 355 

Letter, 2\>d July 17-27, from the King at Nancy to Mr. Lockhart, by Al- 
lan Cameron, explaining the cause of his journey and his hopes of 
assistance from foreign powers .. . 356 

Reflections upon the foregoing letter, and conversation with Colonel 
Clephanc and Allan Cameron upon the dispositions of the High- 
landers .. .. .. .. . . 358 

Letter, 4th August 1727, from Mr. Lockhart to the King, discouraging 

any attempt to land in Scotland .- . 360 

The King quits Nancy and repairs to Avignon 362 

Letter, 25th August 1727, from Sir John Graeme at Avignon to Mr. 

Lockhart, by the King's order, in reply to his last . . 363 

Letter, llth September 1727, from Mr. Lockhart to Sir John Graeme, 
containing his wishes for a reconciliation between the King and 
Queen the character of one Forbes of Knapperlie, and precautions 
to be taken against him and recommending Colonel Clephane to 
the King's bounty .. .. .. 364 

Letter, 18th September 1727, from the same to the same, instructing him 

how to correspond with Lord Dundonald 368 

Letter, 29th September 1727, from Sir John Graeme to Mr. Lockhart, 
concerning the French Government's endeavours to get the King 
sent away from Avignon the Scots correspondence and the King's 
bounty to Colonel Clephane .. .. " 369 

Letter, 6th October 1727, from the same to the same partly to the same 

purport .. .. .. 371 

Letter, 7th October 1727, from Mr. Lockhart to the King that the En- 
glish Ministry were masters of all the King's cyphers and that two 



THE SECOND VOLUME. XV 

Page. 

of his agents in Scotland had confessed all the particulars of his cor- 
respondence there 'i'i^jo 1 r oJi!" 372 

Letter, 24th October 1727, from the King in reply that he had not been 
betrayed by Lord Inverness that there vvas no cause for uneasiness 
about the cyphers and that he had sent for the Queen to Avignon 375 
Letter, 18th November 1727, from Mr. Lockhart to the King upon the 

same subject -. .. .- 376 

Letter, 16th November 1727, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, that Car- 
dinal Alberoni had dissuaded the Queen from proceeding to Avignon 378 
Account of a letter from the Queen to Lady Southesque, with her reasons 

for not going to Avignon . - - 379 

Letter, 6th December 1727, from Mr. Lockhart to the King with his 
sentiments upon the breach between the King and Queen and his 
opinion upon the management of his affairs since 1716, and upon 
the character and conduct of the Duke of Mar, Lord Inverness, and 

others .. .. .- -- . 380 

Letter, 19th December 1727, from the King to Mr. Lockhart, that he 

was returning to Italy .. .. . 388 

Letter, 22d January 1728, from Mr. Lockhart to the King the divided 
state of the Episcopal clergy in Scotland the certainty that the En- 
glish Government possessed the King's cyphers and the opinion 
of Lord Kincardine and others to the disadvantage of the Lords In- 
verness and Dunbar .. _ _ _ _ . . 389 

Letter, 29th January J 728, from the same to the same that he had found 
a master of a Scots ship who would convey the King's dispatches to 

and from Scotland .. .. .. . .... 394 

Mr. Lockhart receives permission from the English Government to re- 
turn home, on condition of passing through London 396 

He leaves Rotterdam, arrives in London, May 1728, and is introduced 

to King George the Second by Sir Robert Walpole . 397 

His interesting conversations with Lord Hay and Mr. Duncan Forbes 398 

He returns to Scotland and withdraws from political life 403 

His reflections upon the state of affairs character of the King and 

little chance of the restoration of the Stuart family 404 

LETTERS, &c. .. .. .. -. 407 

Song .. .. .- -. .. . 409 

Letter to Mr. Salmon . . . . . . 411 

Letter from Mr. Lockhart to his eldest son .. 424 

Letter from Mr. Lockhart to Catherine Countess of Galloway .... 430 



CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 

Ps^. 

Letter from Mr. Lockhart to Lady Eupliemia his .wife . 433 

JOURNALS and MEMOIRS ofthe young Pretender's expedition in 1745 437 

Account of his operations .. . . . . , .. 439 

Journall and Memoirs by a Highland Officer in his army .... 479 

Account of events at Inverness and Culloden .... 513 

Letter written after the battle of Culloden .... .... 593 

Account of the young Pretender's escape .. 539 

The young Pretender in France .. .. .... 553 



REGISTER OF LETTERS 



TWIXT 



THE KING 



AND 



GEORGE LOCKHART OF CARNWAT1I, 



CONTAINING ALSO 



A SHORT ACCOUNT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS 
From 1716 to 1728. 



VOL. II. B 



REGISTER OF LETTERS 



TWIXT 



THE KING 



AND 



GEORGE LOCKHART OF CARNWATH, 



CONTAINING ALSO 



A SHORT ACCOUNT OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS 

From 1716 to 1728. 



I DOE not pretend in this treatise to give a full and perfect ac- 
count of all the transactions in Scotland. My cheif design is to 
narrate such matters as have relation to the intrigues and projects 
that were, at several times, set on foot for the King's service ; 
and even therin I cheifly confine myself to such negotiations as 
I was directly concerned in, 'tho at the same time I cannot shun 
entering sometimes upon publick matters, that the springs and 
series of affairs may be so much the better understood; and 
where any matter of moment concerning Scots men and Scots 
affairs occurr'd to my memory, 'tho somewhat forreign perhaps 
to my main view, I have taken notice of them. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

When the King retired with his little army from Perth in 
1716, he himself went on board a small vessell at Mon- 
trose, from whence, tho' several cruisers were lying neer to that 
place, he arrived safe in France ; and the remains of his army, 
which then consisted of a body of Highlanders under General 
Gordon's command, and a considerable number of noblemen and 
gentlemen marcht northwards ; but being followed closs at the 
heels by the Duke of Argyle, and in no condition to make a stand, 
they soon dispers'd and betook themselves to holes and bores, 
mostly in the remotest highlands and adjacent isles, where many 
lurked till they could with safety appear. But such as were most 
obnoxious took the first opportunity of ships to carry them into 
forreign countrys, in order to which the King himself ordered se- 
veral light vessells to be sent to them from France ; and such of 
his freinds, as had escaped the late hurricane, provyded others 
secretly at home, so as, by God's blessing, all those that were in 
greatest hazard and inclin'd to retire, found means to escape from 
their cruel enemies. 

When the royall party was thus entirely dispersed, and none 
appeared in arms for the King, the great men of the opposite 
side flockt to London, eager to seek and hopefull to obtain re- 
wards suitable to the great merit they severally boasted of, and 
a? the same time full of resentment against their enemies, pro- 
poseing not only to extirpate them root and branch, but at the 
same time to enrich themselves out of their spoils ; but it pleased 
God, by their divisions and animosities, to pave a way for the 
preservation of vast numbers, who, in all probability, would 
otherwyse have melt with no mercy. From the time of Queen 
Ann's death the Scots Torrys had no share in the administration, 
and did not medle in publick matters, which at first fell joyntly 
into the hands of the Duke of Argyle and the Squadrone ; but as 
tliese hated one another heartily, each endeavoured to blacken 
and supplant the other, and their animosities became as great, as 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 5 

if they liad been in the Service of opposite masters and acted for 
opposite causes. No sooner was the battle of Sheriffinoor fought, 
and the suppression of the royall party certain, than the Lord 
Cadogan was sent to Scotland as a check on the Duke of Argyle, 
and when the several partys mett at London, the Sqnadrone ex- 
claim'd against him, condemning his conduct both before and 
during the said battle ; and as they were supported by the then 
powerfull Marleburrow and Cadogan faction, his Grace soon saw 
he was like to reap little personal benefit from the services he had 
* done to the common cause ; and as he had all alongst shewed 
himself of a mercifull disposition, and advised the granting of a 
general indemnity after the battle, to render him now more po- 
pular, he still continued eagerly to oppose the carrying of punish- 
ments too far and too high. The Squadrone again, with their 
English and German supporters, observing that the violent thirst 
after blood which they at first so evidently manifested, woud 
render them odious to most people, and give Argyles party a great 
advantage over them, found it necessary at length to think of 
moi'e gentle ways. But befor matters came to this state, they 
had the pleasure of putting to death a great number of persons, 
amongst whom were several noble Lords and persons of distinc- 
tion at London and in Lancashire ; and when they became more 
gentle, it still evidently appear'd to be contrary to their natural 
tempers, and proceed from some other motive than a mercifull dis- 
position; for they obliged all that were in the several prisons in the 
country, to petition for banishment, and then gave them as slaves 
to a parcell of their trading friends, who sent such away to the 
plantations as could not, at dear rates, purchase their freedom ; 
and all, except a very few that were in prison at Edinburgh or 
London, against whom they could not find evidence, which in 
the end proved pritty difficult to obtain, were try'd and condernn'd, 
and 'tho their lives were spared, their estates were forfeited. For 
'tho the rampant party was in some degree satiated with blood, 



6 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

and saw that the people over all Britain began to resent the too 
liberall effusion therof, and therupon thought fitt to stop, yet 
nothing could divert them from ruining and extinguishing as 
many estates and familys as they could; and in order therto, when 
they found it would not be expedient for them to ask and obtain 
grants of these estates to themselves, the better to cover their se- 
cret malitious views, they procured an act of Parliament, appro- 
priating to the use of the publick the estates of all persons at- 
tainted or condernn'd for being accessory to what they call'd the 
late unnatural! rebellion, and that a commission should be ap- 
pointed, consisting of a parcell of sharping beggarly locusts, to 
enquire into the value of their estates personall and reall, and 
sell them ; the produce wherof, after paying the debts affecting 
them, was to be payd in to the Exchequer. The Whiggs make a 
terrible outcry against the Administration for some years befor 
1688 ; but if a full account was transmitted to posterity, as they 
would judge which was the best cause, it would also appear, that 
the barbarous treacherous usage of the royall party that surren- 
der'd at Preston, the blood that was spilt on scaffolds, the slavery 
to which great numbers were, like brutes, sold, and the illegal 
proceedings of the Commissioners of Enquiry, not only against 
the heirs and representatives, but even the just creditors of the 
familys tliey purposed to demolish, if these matters, I say, were 
fully exposed, it would appear that a precedent can scarcely be 
shewn in any civilized country. 

During the first period of these ticklish times, the Scots Torrys 
were obliged to keep themselves very quiet, and live in the most 
retired manner; for many who were not actually in arms, had by 
other ways been assistant to the royall cause, as their circum- 
stances allowed and occasions offered ; and none of that com- 
plexion could tell how far even innocence was sufficient to pro- 
tect them against a sett of vindictive blood-thirsty men. The first 
ease they gott was from the Indemnity, published in the year 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 7 

17 , but that again was so crouded with exceptions, that it did 
by no means correspond with the mercifull disposition which the 
authors pretended to manifest by it ; so that the triennial prescrip- 
tion of high treason was the first solid relief and security to the 
distress'd royall party ; after which they began to peep out, and 
many, who not inclining to trust themselves in the hands of the 
Government, had retired and lived abroad, and were not under 
any sentence, return'd home to their familys. 

During this intervall the Squadrone gott the better of the Duke 
of Argyle at court, where he and his friends had very little to say ; 
but as the prince and his father were at odds, His Grace adhered 
to and was the cheif adviser of the former, nay was thought to 
have him in leading strings ; and whilst the discord betwixt him 
and the Squadrone dayly increased, the Scots Torrys interfeer'd 
with neither, having at the same time no correspondence abroad, 
further than what by private letters gave an account of the Kings 
and their friends health. There was however a surmise that the 
King had some hopes of gaining the King of Sweden to espouse 
his cause ; and the first nottice therof to be depended upon, was 
a letter from the Duke of Mar to Captain Straiton, which he di- 
rected to be communicated to the Bishop of Edinburgh, the Lord 
Balmerino and my self, wherin he signifyd that if 5 or 6000 
bolls of meal could be purchased by the Kings friends and sent 
to Sweden, where was then a great scarcity, it would be of great 
service to the King. But wee foresaw so many difficultys in 
raising a sum of money sufficient for it (most of those who for- 
merly would have contributed to the King being exiles or for- 
feited, and such as were not so nevertheless in great straits by tlie 
losses they sustain'd and the depredation of their estates during 
the war, and by the great charges they were at in supporting their 
distressed friends abroad and at home) and withall so impracti- 
cable to collect and embark such a quantity of meal, without 
being discovered and creating some suspition in the Government, 



8 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

that wee could not think of undertaking it with any hopes of 
success. 

Not very long after this, another letter came to the same person 
to be communicated as the other, wherin the Duke of Mar re- 
presented, that wheras there was a design to attempt the Kings 
restoration by the assistance of a certain forreign prince, and that 
it would look odd if his freinds at home did not putt themselves in 
a condition to assist him, he thought proper to signify so much 
in general ; and as the want of ready money to be employ'd when 
the King's service required it, had hitherto been a great impedi- 
ment to his affairs, he wisht wee could fall on ways to perswade 
his friends to have in readiness what summ they severally could 
afford and would venture in his cause, when a fair oportunity 
offered. This, for the reasons above narrated, was a matter of 
the greatest difficulty, and as the other three persons were, either 
by the bad state of their healths or other circumstances, no ways 
fitt to goe about as agents in such an affair, the burthen was laid 
upon me; and I had much better success than I expected, having 
gott assurances, in the most solemn manner, from several persons 
of honour, that they would take care to be in a condition to 
answer his majesties call. The Earl of Eglington oftcr'd 3000 
guineas, and signifyd so much by a letter to the King, and the 
others would amongst them have advanced a good round sum. 
Nottice of this was sent both to the King and Duke of Mar, and 
at the same time represented, that as this country did not abound 
in riches, and that the loyall party was less now than ever in a 
condition to raise money, wee were humbly of opinion that 
nothing of this kind should be demanded from them but when 
matters were so well concerted and so far advanced, that the 
main stroke was to be struck. At the same time I received the 
following letter* from the King: 

* Received 21 March 1718. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

" January 1st 1718. 

" The late accounts I have had of your true and sincere friend- 
ship for me, doe not allow me to deferr returning you my heartiest 
thanks for it : you shall, I can assure you, ever find me most 
gratfull, and I hope it will yet be in my power to be so effec- 
tually. I referr to Mar for any thing I had further to say in my 
affairs, and I shall be glad to have your opinion of them from 
time to time, either from your self or our friend Captain Straiten ; 
no body esteems you more than I doe, nor hath a truer value and 
regard for you, being ever 

" Your &c." 

To which I made the following answer : 

"March 26th 1718. 

" Sir I cannot but esteem it the highest honour, that you en- 
tertain so favourable ane opinion of me as you are pleased to 
express in yours of the first of January, which came safely to my 
hands. I am not so vain as to imagine I ever was or will be ca- 
pable to be of any great use to you in your affairs, yet I have the 
satisfaction of being conscious, that as your interest was hitherto 
the cheif object of all my views and desires, since I first applyd 
my self to publick bussiness, I at no time knowingly or willingly 
omitted any thing which I conceived might in the least contri- 
bute therto, and I doe assure you that for the future, I will as 
cheirfully embrace every occasion to doe you all the services in 
my power ; which is indeed no more than what I think my self 
bound to by many particular as well as general obligations, and 
what my inclinations and personal regard for you prompt me to. 
It being unnecessary to repeat what I have writt to the Duke of 
Mar, I will trouble you noe further, but beg leave to subscribe 
my self 

"Your &c." 

The letter from the Duke of Mar mentioned in the King's (of 
which and my answer therto I only keept the heads) recom- 

VOL. II. C 



10 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

mended secrecy amongst the King's friends, the want of which 
had often been very detrimental to the common cause, as he had 
frequently observed, when he had not, at least when it was not 
known he had, any concern or correspondence with the King ; 
he then proceeded to exhort me to try if it was possible to bring 
the Duke of Argyle to think of coming over to the King's mea- 
sures ; this, he thought, I was the properest person to attempt, 
because there was an old firm personal friendship betwixt us, 
which he himself at no time took amiss, because he saw I never 
on that score deviated from my principles, and he thought this a 
proper season, when the Duke was so poorly rewarded for the 
great services he had done to the party, and could not but see 
the unevitable ruin of his native country, and the small grounds 
he had to expect from any English Ministry, the trust and power 
he might justly claim and aim at, on account of his quality, in- 
terest, and merit ; that there was no way to retrive his country and 
doc justice to himself, but by contributing to the King's restora- 
tion ; that His Majestie would meet him with open arms, and he 
should make his own terms. And for his own part, as he never 
was at odds with His Grace but in so far as he wats acting against 
the King's interest, were that obstacle removed, he would con- 
curr in every scheme he could propose for his interest arid glory, 
there being none alive for whom he had a greater honour and 
regard : all which he desired I might represent to him, if so be 
I would undertake and could perform so great a service to the 
King. 

In my answer to this letter I agreed with his sentiments as to 
secrecy, and recommended to him to give strick injunctions to all 
the King's subjects abroad, to write no manner of news, good 
or bad, to their friends at home, for as their letters abounded 
with schemes and often with false hopes, their correspondents 
here could not conceal their joy from others, wherby they soon 
became publick, which induced the Government to be much 

In .aov ' 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 11 

upon their guard, and at the same time justify cl, in some measure,, 
their severity to those they saw so ready to oppose them. As to 
the other part of his letter, I exprest a very great readiness to per- 
form any thing the King required of me for his service, but I 
was affraid matters were now come to such a pass, that the Duke 
of Argyle would never, after having commanded the army du- 
ring the late war, think it was possible for him to be in favour 
with the King. The time indeed once was when such a transac- 
tion jtnight have been undertaken with good hopes of success, 
and with that very view it was that I stood so much up for the 
Duke's interest in Parliament, which he (Mar) then opposed with 
some resentment at my conduct, the grounds wherof I could not 
then communicate to him, since he confessed there was a time 
when his concern for and correspondence with the King was 
not known. However I would cast about to see how matters 
stood, and if I found a proper juncture, and any tollerable hopes 
of success, I would doe what in me lay to bring about, what from 
a regard to both partys I allwyse vehemently desired, and was 
once in a fair way of accomplishing, had not others from pique 
and particular views disconcerted all my schemes. 

It may perhaps appear to some, that this was too tart an 
answer ; but the truth on't is, I could not command my self, 
when I reflected that he had been the principal obstructer of 
this project at a time when it would have been of more use, and 
could have been easier brought about, and that he was con- 
scious I knew this proceeded from his own ambition and envy, 
notwithstanding those professions of friendship he charged me 
with in his letter. 

Whilst time passt thus away, the Duke of Argyle turn'd his 
back on St. James' and resorted altogether to the Prince's Court ; 
but as he found him a worthless giddy-headed creature, no wyse 
to be depended on, he retired much to the country and seemd 
highly discontented. At the same time hjs friends did not stand 



12 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

to tell such as they could confide in, that His Grace was resolved 
to have no further dealings with this Government, and 'tho he 
would doe nothing against it, yet if any attempt was made, he 
himself would stand neutral and leave his Clan to doe as they 
pleased, which, by the by, was known would be in favour of 
the King, from whom they were only diverted by His Graces au- 
thority and interest. Finding matters thus, I took occasion to 
talk seriously at Edinburgh with my old friend Collonel John 
Midleton, who, I knew, at the bottom wished the King very 
well and was much trusted by the Duke, and to him I repre- 
sented, that seeing the Duke could have no prospect of riseing 
under this Government to the power his interest, character and 
station justly entitled him, I could not but imagine he highly re- 
sented such usage ; and as he was naturally ambitious, and it was 
impossible but he must side with and act for some party, in all 
the divisions and contests in this island, I could not see what 
hand he could turn to, or whither he could steer his course, but 
to the King ; taking it for granted he would not render himself 
so little in the eyes of all the world, as again to countenance and 
support the interest of a sett of men, who had used him as a tool 
in being the means of destroying his native country, and ex- 
tirpating so many noble iamilys for the most part nearly related 
to his own, and then sent him a packing. That 'tho he keept in 
with the Prince, he could not but perceive how little he was to 
be depended on, and that if ever his father and he were again 
on good terms, His Grace would be left to pay the piper, and 
'tho he should come to the crown, he would be under a necessity 
of being ruled by English councills and English ministers, all 
which howsoever differently affected, concurr'd in not allowing 
any Scots man to grow too powerfull, or to be trusted but in a 
subordinate manner with the administration of affairs, which in 
no sort suited with His Grace's mind, more than it corresponded 
with his merit. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 13 

Midleton reply d that he perfectly agreed with what I said, and 
had good reasons to beleive His Grace had the same sentiments, 
and as I knew that he was once in the Queen's reign in a fair way 
of being brought over to the King's side, he did not see any 
cause to despaire still of affecting it, notwithstanding what had 
since that time occurred, provyded it were handsomely intro- 
duced and dexterously managed ; but one thing he was sure of, 
His Grace would not directly nor indirectly treat with Mar, or 
any by commission from him, for he beleived him his mortal 
enemy, and had no opinion of his honour ; and added Midleton 
to me, " I cannot think Mar does more seriously now than befor 
desire to see Argyle in the Kings measures, least he eclipsed 
him." I told him that I knew the King desired nothing more than 
to bring the Duke over to him, and I would engage to putt this 
matter on such a footing that Mar should not be concerned less 
or more in it, nay should not know of any correspondence the 
King had with Argyle, for it should be established directly be- 
tween them two and such persons as His Grace should name to 
carry it on, under the strictest tyes of secrecy, untill a proper 
time came for propaleing it. At last wee concluded that I should 
acquaint the King of the fair prospect of gaining the Duke r and 
propose that His Majestie would send me a letter to him in a kind 
strain, inviting him to come into his measures ; and wee thought 
it fitt that no time should be lost in getting this letter, least things 
should alter during the time that was taken up in sending mes- 
sages to and from the King at so great a distance. And w r hilst 
I expected the King's pleasure, Midleton, who was furthwith to 
go to London, undertook to sound the Duke and let me know 
how far he found him disposed to harken to this scheme, ac- 
cording to which wee would take our measures. I accordingly 
writt, but keept no coppy of my letter to the King, giveing him 
an account of this and some former conversations with Midleton, 
from whence I gathered that the Duke might be gaind, and de- 



14 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

sired his directions as soon as possible. And because I foresaw 
that when I came to treat with His Grace, I'd be obliged to give 
him the most solemn assurances that Mar was not privy to it, and 
that he again would be jealous and offended if he came to know 
that letters from Scotland were given to the King without his 
knowledge, besides that I did not then know of any about the 
King that would venture to doe it ; for those reasons I seal'd my 
letter and gott Captain Straiton to send it under a cover to the 
Duke of Mar, and withall to tell him, that I hoped he would 
excuse my not communicating the contents to him, because I 
was bound under the strictest obligations to impart the same to 
no other person whatsoever but the King himself. 

Not many weeks after this, I mett with Captain Dougall Camp- 
bell ; this gentleman, a person of great worth and loyalty, and 
a bosome friend of Argyle's, was lately come to Scotland from 
London, where he had resided these many years bypast. The 
Duke soon became the subject of our conversation, and when J 
perceived that he had great hopes of gaining him, and aflirm'd 
that even the Earl of Isla seem'd we'll disposed, I frankly told him 
all that had passt and been concerted betwixt Midleton and me, 
which he much approved of, being hopefull it would succeed, and 
undertaking to forward it when he return'd to London ; but soon 
after this he unfortunatly gott cold in lu's journey to the High- 
lands, and on his return to Edinburgh took a flux and dyed. A 
few days befor this happen'd, being with me at my country 
house, he askt me, if I heard Argyle blam'd for having received 
and given no answer to a letter writt to him by the King whilst 
he was at Perth ; I told him I had, but could not agree with those 
who censur'd him, for I had such an abhorrence at breach of 
trust, that had I been the Duke's adviser, it should have been to 
doe as he did ; for 'tho there was nothing I so much desired as to 
see him engaged in the King's cause, I wisht it done in a way 
consistent with his honour. Campbell smiled and told me he was 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 15 

to acquaint me of a secret which he must previously have my 
solemn word I would communicate to none, which he had given 
when it was revealed to him, having however obtained liberty 
afterwards to speak of it to me. After giving him the assurance 
he demanded, he told me, that the letter was not delivered to the 
Duke, for in his late Highland progress he saw it and another to 
Lord Isla in the hands of the person to whose care they were 
committed (but who that person was he would not tell me) 
who receiving them unseal'd did not, after perusal, think it for 
the Kings service to deliver them, that to the Duke being writt 
in a style by no means to be approved of; " And indeed," added 
Campbell, " when I read them I was entirely of the same mind, 
and could not but think that Mar, or some other person, with a 
view of rather widning than healing the breaches, had pre- 
vail'd with the King to write after that manner." The letter to 
Isla was writt as to a man of business, insisting on the unhappy 
state of Scotland, and that nothing but a dissolution of the Union 
by the King's Restoration could prevent the utter ruin of that 
country. That to the Duke did invite him to return to his loyalty 
and duty, threatening him, if he neglected, with revange and 
the utter extirpation of his family, for what he and his predeces- 
sors had done in this and the last century. I doe not pretend to 
relate the precise words of this letter, nor did Campbell mention 
them as such to me ; however I have narrated what he said was 
the aim and purport of the letter. I was not a little surprized, 
and at first doubted if it was genuine ; but then he assured me it 
was under the King's own hand, which he knew perfectly well. 
After having reflected on this very odd letter, I was confirm'd in 
the opinion of its being absolutly necessary that Mar should 
know nothing less or more of any correspondence that might be 
sett on foot betwixt the King and Duke of Argyle. 

Collonel Midleton was not many days in London till he wrote 
to me that he had made a tryall and was in hopes my friend would 



nrcisTER OF LETTERS. 

accept of the Galloway (wee haveing agreed to couch the 
matter in our letters under the name of a Scots pad that was to be 
sent up) and therfor desired I would make haste to be master of 
one fitt for him ; and not long after that, he wrote to me again, that 
my friend w r ould receive the Galloway if I came up and made him 
the present, in doing of which no time was to be lost. This mes- 
sage overjoy'd me, and I impatiently waited for the King's answer 
(Midleton calling for me in the interim two or three times by 
other letters to strike the iron while it was hot) for above seven 
months, and when it came I was not more vexed than surprized; 
for as this was a matter of no small importance, I had reason to 
expect a particular return, and in less than half that time; wheras 
the answer was contain'd in the postscript of a letter from the 
Duke of Mar to Captain Straiten, wherin he bid him tell me that 
the King had received my letter, but not approving what I pro- 
posed, Avould enter into no measures with that person, hoping 
(by the assistance of Sweden I suppose) to doe his bussiness 
without him. I knew not in all the world what to say to Midle- 
ton, for I had no mind to let him know that the King had re- 
vealed the affair to Mar, much less the nature of the return I had 
gott to my proposal ; so I pretended that I had gott no answer, 
which I ascribed to my letters having miscarried, and by such 
shifts and excuses endevour'd to putt the best face I could upon 
it, which I could not however so well feign but that he suspected 
I had melt with a rebute ; and how far this influenced the Duke 
to think of making up matters some time afterwards with King 
George, when he had left the Prince as one in whom he could 
have no honour in adhereing to, I will not take upon me to say ; 
but indeed when I reflected how near resemblance there was be- 
twixt this and an answer formerly sent by the Earl of Midleton 
to a proposal of the same kind, when I considered the part wliich 
Mar acted in the latter end of the Queen's reign towards Argyle, 
and the account which Campbell gave me of the letter from 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 17 

Perth, and that by Mar's handing the return to me, it would seem 
the King had communicated the proposal to him, 'tho I had begd 
as a thing essentially necessary to keep it in his own breast; these 
things made me inclinable to beleive my Lord Mar had taken the 
liberty to break up my letter, and, without acquainting the King 
of the contents, given his own answer therto, which I judged 
still the more probable, that he did not doe it directly to my self, 
but in a letter to a friend of his own, who he was sure would 
not bring it in judgement against him ; and what I then ima- 
gined seems now to be confirm'd, in that the King some time 
after this told my son, when he at Rome verbally by my direc- 
tion renew'd the proposal, and represented what a fair opportu- 
nity had been formerly lost, that he did not remember ever to 
have heard of it befor. 

The King's affairs for a long time made little or no noise, but 
on breaking out of the war with Spain, people began to hope, 
that something in his favours would cast up, and whilst wee were 
fed with these hopes in very general terms by letters from abroad, 
all of a sudden wee received the joy full news of the King of 
Spain's having declared for our King. What correspondence 
King Philip had in England I cannot particularly tell, but sure 
I am there was not the least intimation of such a design to any 
in Scotland, untill a very little befor it was publick over all 
Europe. About which time the Earl of Wigton writt a letter to 
me from his country house, desireing me to meet him without 
fail next day exactly at four in the afternoon at a certain private 
place in Edinburgh, and I having accordingly keept the tryst, 
His Lordship introduced me to Mr. Francis Kennedy ; this gen- 
tleman was sent express to acquaint the King's friends of the at- 
tempt that was to be made by Spain on Britain, and he was 
directed to goe first to my Lord Wigton, who thought fitt to call 
me to be present at the conference. Mr. Kennedy produced a 
small peice of parchment, writt and sign'd by the Duke of Or- 

VOL. II. D 



18 UEGISTEJl OF LETTERS. 

mpnd, desireing entire credit might be given to the bearer tlierof ; 
and itben he told us that the Duke was actually embarked with 
a considerable body of Spanish troops, designing to land them 
ia England, and that the Earl Marishall was sail'd with a bat- 
talion, accompanyd by the Marquis's of Tullibardin and Sea- 
forth, and some of the heads of the Highland clans, and was to 
land in the Highlands ; that the troops design'd for England and 
Scotland were sufficient to make a stand till the Kings friends 
could gett togitlier, that he durst say Marishall was landed befor 
that day, and that wee would soon hear of the like of Ormond ; 
and he desired wee would consider what was to be done for the 
King's service at this criticall juncture. After having fully talked 
over the affair, wee judged it highly necessary to conceal this in- 
telligence as long as it was possible, because wee perceived the 
Spainards design'd to catch the British Government naping. Be- 
sides, as there were many accidents to which the Spanish fleet 
might be exposed in so long a voyage, wee did by no means 
think it adviseable to move in Scotland, till wee were sure the 
Duke of Ormond was landed ; for if any appearance should be 
made for the King in Scotland, and the grand design fail in the 
execution, wee would meet with no quarters from the Govern- 
ment, and the King at the same time reap no benefit. 

A few days after this, the Spanish design against Britain was 
known every where, and that the Earl Marishall was actually 
landed at in the Highlands ; and wee dayly expected 

and impatiently long'd to hear the same of the Duke of Or- 
mond in England. A great many days being spent in this un- 
certain state of hopes and fears, wee had at length the me- 
lancholy account of his being beat back by a storm, which at 
once putt an end to our hopes and our enemies well grounded 
fears ; for it is more than probable that if His Grace had escaped 
this storm, he had been in England ere the Government had 
known of the design and had been in a capacity to oppose him, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 19 

especially when it is certain that the body of the people of En- 
gland were groaning under the yoke of the present tyrrany, and 
that great numbers of the first rank and greatest interest, and 
many officers, some even of the highest stations in the army, 
were privy to the design and ready to joyn him ; and the zeal of 
the Scots for the King was rather encreased than lessen'd by 
former misfortunes, so that his friends in Scotland, whilst there 
was a diversion to the standing army in England, would have 
made a short work of it. It was pritty remarkable that the Go- 
vernment did not on the first surmise, as formerly on the like oc- 
casions, croud the prisons with suspected persons ; whether it was 
that they were confounded and at a loss what to doe in so unex- 
pected a surprize, or that they really designd, as some of them 
pretended, to leave every man to himself, and have a fair general 
stroke for it, that so the contest might be finally ended by the 
total extirpation of the vanquish! party, I wont determine. 

I doe not pretend to give an account of my Lord Marishall's 
proceedings ; one thing is sure, that he and Tullibardin were 
soon at variance about the command, and it seem'd very odd that 
such matters were not adjusted befor their embarkation ; the 
Highlanders being formerly heartiely bitt, resolved not to move 
till they heard of Ormond's being landed, so that few except 
Seaforth's clan joyn'd this little army, which however keept to- 
gather, till General Wightman marched against them with a 
strong body of regular troops, in which were several batallions 
of Dutch auxiliaries, (for so terribly aflfraid were King George 
and his Ministry, that 'tho they knew the Duke of Ormond was 
driven back, they did not think themselves secure, untill, at a 
great expence of money, they brought over these forreign troops, 
wherof a good part was sent to Scotland) and after a smart action 
at Glenshiles, wherin a considerable number of Wightmans men 
were killd, the Highlanders dispersed into the mountains, and 
the Spanish batallion surrender'd themselves prisoners of war; 



20 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

Marishall and other persons of iiotte lurking in the Highlands 
till ships were provyded to carry them off. In the intervall be- 
twixt the Lord Marishalls landing-, and the accounts of the Duke 
of Osmonds fate, I had an oportunity of sending the following 
Memorial to Marishall, which I judged might be usefull to him 
in case the enterprize was like to goe on ; whither it came to his 
hands, I cant tell. 

" The Kings friends are far from being diminished on the south 
side of Forth, and are abundantly willing to venture all in his 
service ; but they have been keept so much at under these three 
or four years by past, and so little expected what has of late oc- 
curr'd, that most of them want horses and arms, and it will be 
no easie matter to procure them; and as they are surrounded with 
spys and enemies, and cannot propose to make such a body as can 
resist the force that will be sent against them if they take to the 
feilds, it is not to be desired or expected they should rise in arms 
uutill there be such a number of forces near them, as can make a 
stand, and to which they may resort. 'Tho the King does not 
want some friends in the western shires, yet the gross of the 
people both gentry and commons are either prysbyterians favour- 
ably disposed towards the present Government, or pritty indiffe- 
rent as to all Governments whatsoever ; but as the far greatest 
part of both these have an heartie aversion to the Union, if once 
they were throughly convinced that the King's prosperity would 
terminate in the dissolution therof, there is reason to beleive a 
great many of the first would be converted, at least so far as to 
be neu trail, and most of the others declare for him. And ther- 
for it is thought proper that the Earl Marishall should publish a 
Manifesto, in which, after having at large enumerated the many 
greivances attending the Union, such as the decay of trade, and 
the violation of the Scots libertys and civil rights, &c. he should 
declare that it is the King's intention to restore his Scots subjects 
to their ancient rights and independent state, and that he him- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 21 

self and those with him appear in arms as well to redeem the 
nation as restore the King, and that he does therby invite all his 
fellow subjects to contribute towards so just, honourable, and 
necessary an undertaking. And in this Manifesto, assurance 
should be given that a Scots Parliament will be invited to meet 
as soon as the posture of affairs will allow the same to assemble, 
that such laws may be therin made and past as shall be judged 
necessary for settling the peace and tranquillity of the nation 
and securing the liberties and religion of the same ; and lastly 
recommend to the several electors in shyres and burrows to have 
their thoughts on persons fitt to be appointed their representa- 
tives, when matters of such universal consequence are to be de- 
terrnin'd. At present there is none on the south of Forth to 
whom the King's friends can repare for intelligence, or to have 
instructions and directions as to their conduct and measures ; 
and thence it is that there is no correspondence nor concert 
amongst them, which in the event may occasion many inconve- 
niencies : it is therfor proposed that the Earl Marishall would 
impower, or at least recommend to a small number of persons, 
to be by him named, to meet and concert such measures as to 
them seems most conducive to the King's service, and that with 
them he would correspond and give them such directions as from 
time to time he shall judge proper: This being done and the 
King's friends apprised of it, their intelligence and measures will 
be more uniform and regular than can be expected in their pre- 
sent uncertain state and condition. And because the Earl Mari- 
shall cannot in his present state and circumstances so well know 
what persons are in a condition to execute such a trust, it will 
not be amiss to mention the Earls of Eglington and Wigton, the 
Lord Balmerino, the Bishop of Edinburgh and Mr. John Paterson, 
as persons that will be faithfull to the King and agreeable to his 
freinds." 

A resolution having been universally taken not to move in 



22 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Scotland till England was fairly engaged, this measure was very 
near being broke by a peice of odd conduct of Captain Straiton 
at Edinburgh. There came, it seems, an unknown fellow to one 
Mr. Millns, tutor to Mr. Macdonald yonger of Glengarie, and 
told him that being a servant to Cameron of Locheal, he came 
with him from Spain, and was set on shoar on the coast of Gal- 
loway from the Duke of Ormond's fleet as it past by, with orders 
to goe and acquaint his master's friends to be ready to take up 
arms. Mr. Millns carried this fellow to Captain Straiton, who 
with joy heard and gave some credit to what he so earnestly 
wished, and was soon confirm'd in the truth therof by a letter 
sent express by the Viscount of Stormont, then at his house in 
Annandale, giving an account that five or six days befor the date 
a large fleet of tall ships, being no doubt Ormond's fleet, past by 
that coast, sailing with a fair wind directly for the west of En- 
gland. Straiton having after this no remaining doubts, sent off 
an express to acquaint my Lord Nairn in Perth-shire, that the 
Duke was on the coast and certainly landed by that time, and 
desireing His Lordship to forward the good news to Marishall 
and other proper persons in the Highlands, that no time might 
be lost in drawing to the feilds; and as he imparted it likwyse 
to some in and about Edinburgh, the Earl of Dalhousie and some 
other gentlemen of that county gott on horseback, with a reso- 
lution to try if they could joyn Ormond, for they knew there 
was no possibility of getting up to Marishall ; but I persuaded 
His Lordship to stop at Selkirk on pretence of seeing the race* 
till I enquired further into the story, and sent him nottice; and I 
went instantly to Edinburgh, where having examin'd Straitons 
intelligence, I soon found he was deceived, for I did not think it 
probable that Ormond would allow such a fellow to come on 
shoar, when I knew he aim'd at being himself the first messenger 
of his errand: besides, having no credentials from his master, 
he could doe no service in the matter he pretended ; and lie gave 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 23 

no tollerable account of himself, not so much as knowing the 
name of the port in Spain from whence his master and he came 
with the fleet ; from all which I concluded he was a rogue that 
proposed by this story to gett a little money, or that he was sett 
out by some of the Government (who by this time had certain 
assurances of the Duke of Ormond's misfortune, 'tho they did 
not own it) with a view of persuading some of the King's friends 
to leap at the bait and goe to arms, and therby afford a handle 
to ruin them. And as for my Lord Stormont's information, I was 
sure if the fact had been as he represented, wee must, since the 
time lie mention'd, being eight or nine days, have had the cer- 
tainty of it even in the publick letters ; and I gave the less credit 
when I perceived his Lordship's letter was dated at one in the 
morning, about which time I knew he was apt to credit any 
news that pleased him. Having joyn'd all these considerations 
togither, I immediatly sent to stop Dalhousie ; and I dispatched 
Mr. George Kinnaird with the utmost expedition to Nairn, to 
advertise him of the false intelligence he had gott ; for which he 
gave me afterwards many thanks, as it was the means of saving 
him and many others that were ready and resolved to gett 
speedily togither and joyn Marishall. 

When the Spanish battallion were brought prisoners to Edin- 
burgh, the officers, who had the liberty of the town, were used 
by the loyall party with all the civility and kindness imaginable ; 
but the Government for a long time refused to advance sub- 
sistance money to them, by which in a little time they were re- 
duced to great straits, which appeared even in their looks 'tho 
their Spainish pride would not allow them to complain. As I was 
well acquainted with Don Nicolas who commanded them, I took 
the liberty to ask him if he wanted money; and finding it was 
so, I told him it was unkind in him to be thus straitned, when 
he knew our King, for whose cause he suffer'd, had so many 



24 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

friends in town that would cheirfully assist him ; so I immediatly 
gott him credit for as much money as was necessary for himself 
and his men, till he gott bills from the Marquis de Beretti-Landi 
the Spanish ambassadour in Holland, when he thankfully re- 
pay'd what was advanced to him. 

Befor I leave this Spanish affair I must mention a pritty odd 
story which I had frum Colonel Guest, a very discreet gentleman 
and well disposed to the King. It seems, about the time the 
Spanish invasion was discover'd, he was with two or three 
troops of dragoons quartered in Stafford shyre or Warwick 
shyre, but I have forgott which. There he received orders sign'd 
by King George himself, directing him, that if there happen'd 
any riots or disorders, to burn, shoot, or destroy without asking 
questions, for which, and all that he in execution of these orders 
should doe contrary to law, he therby . previously indemnifyd 
him. The Colonel was thunder-struck with these orders, they 
were what, on no account, he would execute, neither durst he, 
for the people; in that country were all well affected to the King, 
and would have torn him and his men to peices, and if Ormond 
had landed, he must either have surrender'd or joynd them with 
his men. Having seriously reflected on these orders, he thought 
it best to communicate them to some of the leading gentry of 
the place, telling them that he did not know whither they were 
design'd as a snare to him or them, that for all their sakes he 
wisht they would keep the peace, for as he would not perform 
what was required, he hoped they would at the same time pre- 
vent his being brought to trouble. This method was kindly 
taken, and they assured him he should be safe and free from all 
insults, unless there was a general insurrection, when they would 
be glad to have him with them. There was accordingly no dis- 
turbance in that place, tho at the same time the people were 
prepared and resolved to take the feilds as soon as Ormond landed. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 25 

This passage I take nottice of as it seems somewhat a kin to the 
affair of Glencoe, and tis probable the like orders were givn 
to other officers. 

Some months after this Spanish affair was over, and whilst 
there appear'd no prospect of any design in favours of the King, 
I happen'd one evening to converse at length on the state of his 
affairs with that worthy prelate the Bishop of Edinburgh ; and 
he told me that he often regrated there were no persons here im- 
power'd by him to overlook his affairs, and give such directions 
from time to time as should be thought necessary, that by such 
an establishment an unity of measures would be maintain'd 
amongst the King's friends, proper schemes might be concerted 
and pursued, and many things which did much harm be pre- 
vented. I reply'd that I had long been of the same mind, par- 
ticularly since the first news of the Spanish invasion, for at that 
time the King's friends acted without concert, and many incon- 
veniencies would have happen'd, had the enterprize been fol- 
lowed out, which I was perswaded would have been prevented 
if such a power as he mention'd had been established; and I 
wisht His Lordship would propose it to the King. He answered 
he had done it above a year agoe in a letter to Mar, which he 
desired him to communicate to the King : but as he had no re- 
turn he suspected that noble Lord, for reasons best known to 
himself, did not approve of it and had not acquainted the King 
of it; and if that was the case, it was needless for him to repeat 
it. I told him if he had no other objection, I knew how to have 
the proposall made directly to the King himself, for my son 
would be by that time at Rome, and I'd undertake he'd deliver 
any memorial or message His Lordship would trust him with ; or 
if he pleased, and would allow me to use his name, I would ac- 
quaint my son at large of what past in this conversation, and 
desire him to lay the same befor His Majestie. This the Bishop 
heartiely agreed to, and desired I would not neglect it: and as 

VOL. II. E 



26 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

the King could not at the distance he was, and during the present 
situation of affairs, be so well apprised of persons characters and 
circumstances as was needfull, in making such a choice as would 
answer the purpose with respect to their capacity and being agree- 
able to his friends, he judged it necessary to mention a certain num- 
ber who wee reckon'd well qualifyd might be trusted and would be 
generally agreeable. And in concerting this list, wee had under 
consideration, that it should consist of persons not absolutly de- 
pendant on either Mar or Marishall and the party that joyn'd with 
him in opposition to the other, at least that there should be a mix- 
ture of both their friends, that so the measure might not appear to 
be a party bussiness, but really calculated for the King's service, 
without any by views whatsoever ; and wee accordingly pitched 
upon the Earls of Eglington and Wigton, the Lord Balmerino, 
the Bishop of Edinburgh, Mr. Paterson of Prestonhall, and Cap- 
tain Straiten. The Bishop desired I would add my self, but that 
I declin'd, seeing the motion was to come from me, and my son to 
be the actor in it. Against these wee reckon'd there could be no 
exceptions, and most of them liv'd near Edinburgh or were fre- 
quently there, and at hand to act as occasion offer'd. 

I lost no time in writing to my son on the subject, setting furth 
at length the many inconveniencies that had happend from the 
want of such a power lodged in proper hands, ana the great ad- 
vantages which in all probability would attend it, when duely 
executed ; desireing him to demand a private audience of the 
King, and from the Bishop and me lay this proposal befor him 
At the same time, when I reflected on what the Bishop told me 
of his suspicion that Mar did not communicate to the King such 
proposals as he himself did not previously relish, and the return 
I gott to what I had wrote concerning Argyle, I judged it not 
amiss once more to try if I could bring that project to bear, 
especially seeing by some late correspondence with Midleton, I 
found it was still practicable, and I instructed my son to acquaint 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 27 

the King at length, with all the reasons I had to hope such a 
treaty might be happy ly accomplish!, if he would be pleased to 
send me a letter to His Grace, kindly inviting him to come into 
his measures, but withall requiring as a preliminary that he 
would give his royall promise to communicate this proposal and 
what should follow theron to no soul living, for otherwyse 1 
knew it would be in vain for me to think of serving him in it. 
And as it was probable the King would communicate the first 
proposal to Mr. James Murray, and that he would endeavour to 
have his father the Viscount of Stormont added to the list ; by 
the Bishop's allowance I acquainted my son, that in case he found 
it so, that he should frankly tell the King he was directed to in- 
form him, that no body would undertake his service in conjunc- 
tion with that Lord, who knew not what it was to keep a secreet, 
and had not resolution necessary for those imployd in such mat- 
ters ; which caveat was very seasonable, as it prevented his being 
named. My letter having gone safe to my son, he executed 
what was committed to his charge, and I received the following 
letter* from him. 

" Rome, February 20, 1720. 

" Last post in a short letter I acquainted you that your former 
letters were come safe, particularly those relating to the Commis- 
sion you proposed and Argyle's affair. I don't know if I had 
time to tell you, that two or three days after receiving yours, I 
had a long discourse with the King on these points ; but if not, 
I now take the liberty to tell you, that, for the sake of my me- 
mory, I transcribed the passages in your letter that related to 
the two different aflkirs contain'd in it ; after reading, he desired 
me leave them with him, and then after many kind acknowledge- 
ments of your friendship to him, told me he had never heard any 
thing of these matters befor ; so it seems all the letters on these 

* Received 15 Aprile, 1720. 
E 2 



28 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

subjects have either been suppressed or miscarried. He was be- 
for hand with me as to Argyle's capacity and usefullness, if he 
would but accept and help to manage his affairs, and he promised 
to be very cautious. He sett about the Commission next day as 
he told me, and a coppy is sent to Captain Straiton. Its true 
some people are putt in more than you named, but I fancy my 
Lord Dun won't medle in it. I mention'd this to Mr. Murray, 
but he answer'd, if they would not medle, the King at least 
shew'd them his good will, and they would be his fast friends 
afterwards. It is but two hours agoe that he sent for me and 
delivered the inclosed ; he was pleased to communicate his rea- 
sons for not writing a formall letter to Argyle, and said he was 
very hopefull he had given you so many good reasons as would 
satisfy you ; so since I can but repeat or putt in a worse light 
what he has writt, it is better in my opinion to referr you to the 
inclosed letter. I beg'd him to look on the affair in general as 
the effect of your zeal for his service. 

" In all this matter I am sure you and I have done our duty, of 
which he seems very sensible, and in many respects deserves all 
the service his friends can doe for him. I had almost forgott to 
tell you that at parting he desired me to make his compliments 
to you, and that you would write frequently to him, and that he 
expected you would all in general acquaint him of such storys 
as were writt home and spred abroad in order to divide his friends 
and lessen the good opinion people had of his servants here. To 
this I made a bow but no answer, as I did not well understand 
his meaning, and won't allow my self to beleive he'd have you 
or any of these gentlemen turn tale-bearers or tatlers. Murray 
mention'd the same thing more fully to me ; and I answer'd, I was 
persuaded these gentlemen would doe the King all the service 
they could, but that many storys were told not worth the report- 
ing or taking nottice of. I should think my self much to blame 
did I not communicate to you, that, to my great surprize, I find 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 29 

Colonel Hay is let in to the story of Argyle ; how farr that is 
consistent with your inclinations and the King's promise, I know 
not. I am affraid it proceeds from a mistake in his beleiving 
that himself and his servant are but one and the same person ; 
however that be, you will act in it as you judge most safe for 
your friend and your self. Let me have your sentiments, and 

beleive me to be 

" Yours &c." 

The following letter from the King is what was inclosed in 
the above. 

" February 15, 1720. 

"I saw a few days agoe a paper you sent hither for my perusal, 
in which I remarked, with pleasure, that same good sense and 
affection for me I allways found in you and of which I am truely 
sensible. I am entirely convinced of the advantage it would be 
to my affairs that some persons of weight and prudence should 
frequently conferr togithcrand communicate to me their opinion 
and reflections on matters, and at the same time, on proper oc- 
casions, give such advice to the rest of my friends, as might 
conduce to our common good. To appoint a certain number of 
persons for this effect by commission is by no means at this time 
adviseable, because of the inconveniencies it might draw sooner 
or latter on the persons concern'd ; since it could not but be ex- 
pected that the present Government would at long run be in- 
form'd of such a paper, which by its nature must be known to a 
great number of people ; besides that many who might be most 
fitt to discharge such a trust, might with reason not be fond of 
having their names exposed in such a matter ; while on the other 
hand numbers might be disobliged for not having a share where 
it is not possible all can be concern'd ; but I think all these in- 
conveniencies may be obviated, the intent of the proposal com- 
ply'd with, and equall advantages drawn from it, if the persons 
named below, or some of them, would meet and consult togather 



30 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

for the intents above mention 'd. The persons yon propose I en- 
tirely approve, to witt, the Earls of Eglington and Wigton, 
Lord Balnierino, the Bishop of Edinburgh, Mr. Paterson and 
Captain Straiton, to whom I would have added Mr. Harry Maul, 
Sir John Ereskine, Lord Dun, Powrie and Glengary. Now as 
these gentlemen want, I know, no spur to their zeal for my 
service, and that out of regard to them, I am unwilling to write 
directly at present to them, I am persuaded that when this letter 
is communicated to them, they will willingly enter into what is 
proposed for our mutuall advantage; and to make the thing easier 
to you, I send a duplicate of this to Straiton, that either by him 
or you it may be communicated to the persons concernd, with 
all that is kind to them in my name; and if any of them are de- 
sireous upon occasions to consult others not named in this letter, 
1 shall entirely approve it; but what I desire may be the first point 
settled is that of a regular correspondence with me. For which 
end, if Straiton is not sufficient, I shall approve of any person 
my friends shall appoint for that effect, as I have already that 
one Mr. Cowpar should be assisting to Straiton on occasions, 
Brigadeer Campbell having represented him to me as one agree- 
able to them ; but whoever is appointed, as I may say, the se- 
cretary of my friends with you, should be very particular in his 
accounts, and inform me of the different advices ; and as enemies 
are not wanting who officiously spred storys to dishearten or dis- 
unite my friends, it will be also convenient that such reports be 
also communicated to me, to the end that things, on occasions, 
may be putt in their true light, and that persons may not be im- 
posed upon by lyes or malicious insinuations. I was heartiely 
glad to find by a letter I lately received from your parts that 
friends there continue to have the same good opinion of Mar he 
ever deserved, and I dare answer for him ever will. I am doing- 
all that lys in .my power towards his liberty, and I hope a peace 
will soon restore me so worthy and usefull a servant ; and in. the 



REGISTER OF LETTERS: 31 

mean time when I doe not write to your party my self, I shall 
make James Murray doe it, who having had for many years the 
lives and fortunes of the most considerable in England in his 
hands, will make any of yours very safe there also. I think I 
have no more to say to the proposal you have made me as your 
opinion and that of several others, and by the method here pre- 
scrived I think wee reap all the benefit without inconvenience. 
The good and wellfare of your country is what I ever shall have 
at heart, and I shall alwyse with pleasure enter into what is pro- 
posed for that end, which with the assurance of my particular 
regard and kindness for you is all I have to say. &c." 

In regard I would not take upon me to act as a trustee, because 
I was not expressly named in the above letter, Captain Straiten ac- 
quainted Mr. Murray therof, and the King was pleased to add me 
to the number, by a letter to Straiton of which this is a coppy. 

" June 14th, 1720. 

" I perceive by yours to Murray that in a paper latly sent you 
Mr. Lockharts name was forgott ; it was only an error in coppy- 
ing, for it alwyse was and it is my intention that he should be of 
the number." 

Besides this first letter (which was to be communicate as a 
warrant to others) I at the same time receiv'd the following let- 
ter from the King : 

" February 17th, 1720. 

" After having writt to you my opinion in most of our private 
concerns, I must mention here one article, which I entirely agree 
with you is of the greatest importance. No body can have a 
more just value and esteem for the great lawyer (i. e. the Duke 
of Argyle) you mention than I have ; the consequence of gain- 
ing him is obvious, and towards that, nothing shall be neglected 
by me, since what is past shall never be a hindrance to his being 
used as a true friend by me, if he proves himself such hereafter. 
After this, I doe not entirely agree with you in the ways and 



3'2 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

means to be made use of, having reasons not lo write as you pro- 
pose, till such time as you acquaint me that a letter will be ac- 
ceptable ; your intimacie with him makes you the properest per- 
son to feel his pulse, and that should, I think, preceed all other 
steps. You can take a proper time to bring on the discourse, in- 
form him of my sentiments, and remove all jealousie or uneasi-> 
ness on account of past transactions ; and if, upon his entering 
into the matter, you find a letter would be relished, I shall then 
write it and send it to you, taking my rise from your conversation. 
I take this to be the most prudent and effectuall way of proceed- 
ing, and if you can bring this affair to a good issue, it is a favour 
J shall ever acknowledge, as I shall your endevours towards it 
whatever the event may be. I am far from thinking any step of 
this kind dishonourable ; for in my case, whatever is not unjust 
can never be against honour, since the gain of my suit is what 
I am resolved to pursue by all lawfull means ; and for the neces- 
sary secret you recommend, you may be assured that all due re- 
gard to it shall be had on all accounts. I have had occasion of 
late of seeing your son, who hath a very good character, and who 
will, I doubt not, continue to deserve the friendship of those 
who are sincere friends to his family. The regard now shewn 
to your advice will, I hope, encourage you to continue to let me 
partake of it on proper occasions, and you will but doe me jus- 
tice in beleiving me full of gratitude and esteem for you, being 

ever 

" Your &c." 

Upon the recept of this letter, I immediatly made the follow- 
ing return, but omitted to mark down the date therof. 
:i? Sir Being, at the time of receiving your letter and writing 
of this, at some miles distant from Straitoa, with whom it is ne- 
cessary I talk, be for I can say any thing distinctly on the contents 
of yours, I would not however delay making my very humble 
acknowledgements for the honour you doe me in reposeing any 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 33 

the least trust in me, and in a particular manner for the regard 
you have been pleased to shew my son ; that he may truely merit 
the continuation of your favourable opinion, is my utmost de- 
sire, and I hope his highest ambition. I dare confidently affirm 
I never entered into any measm*e nor gave any advice that did 
not, according to the best of my judgment, appear for your in- 
terest and service. That of late, with respect to the Commis- 
sion, was the joynt and concurring opinion of several very suf- 
ficient well designing persons, and I make no question, if duly 
and discreetly executed, but it will turn to good account ; one 
thing I am sure of, that many inconveniencies arose on many 
occasions for the want of it. The other matter, relating to Ar- 
gyle, did come indeed only from my self, the nature of the affair 
being such as required that no other person whatsoever should 
be privy to it. But as what I proposed proceeded altogether from 
a good intention, I submitted all and every part of the scheme to 
you, with whom I readily agree, that befor the attempt is made, 
it is highly expedient to sound the other's pulse, and be assured 
of its success ; and for no other reason did I propose the letter's 
being sent, but that no time might be lost in striking the iron 
when it is duely heated. But since another course is, by a much 
more sufficient judge in such matters, thought reasonable, I very 
readily succumb therto, and will not fail to use my utmost en- 
devours ; with what success, its impossible just now to tell or 
so much as guess ; yet notwithstanding all that has of late oc- 
curr'd, I am far from thinking the game irretrivable, 'tho not so 
probable, as some few years agoe when I proposed it. The result 
of my endevours in this affair shall be communicate to you, not 
doubting of that profound secrecy on which the success so abso- 
lutly depends. I have nothing more to trouble you with at present, 
but to beg you'l doe me the justice to beleive there is nothing I so 
much covet, as to deserve and obtain the character of being 

" Yours &c." 

VOL. II. F 



34 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

I own I was a little surprized at the King's niceness in writing 
to the Duke, and I did not think it expedient to broach this matter 
to the Duke without having vouchers for what I was to say and 
the hopes I was to give him, that matters should be adjusted to his 
satisfaction ; but what cheifly influenced me to drop the attempt 
for some time was Colonel Hay's being apprised of it ; for be- 
sides that I could not in honour assure the Duke that this matter 
was to be managed wholly betwixt the King and him when I 
knew others had already nottice of it, I could easiely foresee if 
ever this matter w r as discovered, the Duke would think I had not 
done fairly with him, and never more confide in me ; and I had 
reason to fear the worst, seeing I understood Captain Straiten, 
by some intelligence I beleive from Rome, had smoakt my design, 
and was so imprudent as to exclaim against it to some of my 
friends, alleging it was a jest to attempt it, and that the Duke 
was not to be trusted, even 'tho he engaged ; which I reckond did 
proceed from his friendship and attachment to Mar; so that in 
the mean time I was obliged to suspend all thoughts of moving 
in this affair, and even be at pains to cause the Captain beleive 
I was now of my self convinced it was a chimerical scheme, as 
he was pleased to term it ; with a resolution however of prose- 
cuting it whenever I saw a fitt oportunity ; but befor that hap- 
pen'd, His Grace had left the prince and made up matters with 
the Ministry, and was made lord high chamberland of the house- 
hold ; after which there were no further thoughts to be enter- 
tain'd of gaining him. 

With the first oportunity, I acquainted the several persons of 
the honour they had received from the King by the trust he had 
placed in them, and they all frankly undertook the office ; but in 
regard many inconveniencies would follow a discovery therof, 
and that there was no occasion just now to act or let their powers 
be known, even to the loyall party, they all seem'd inclin'd that 
the letter, naming and impowering them to act for the King in 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 35 

his affairs, should remain with me, and that when any thing oc- 
currd, wherin their directions here or their advice to the King 
were necessary, that I should state the matter to such of them 
as I could conveniently meet with, and from their several senti- 
ments give the proper instructions here with due caution, and 
communicate their opinions to the King, and when any com- 
mands came from him to them, which they desired might be ad- 
dress'd to me, that I should take the like method to apprize them 
therof. 

Befor these above recited letters from the King came to my 
hands, the Bishop of Edinburgh, to the irreparable loss of Church 
and King, departed this life. And it being absolutly necessary 
that some one of the Bishops should be appointed to reside at 
Edinburgh and take the cheif government of the Church upon 
him, there was some appearance of factions and divisions amongst 
the Episcopall clergy on this head ; but Mr. Paterson and I kecpt 
closs in town with them, and were at much pains to prevail with 
them to take no resolutions till the College of Bishops were con- 
veen'd. And as it was of great importance that one of a good 
character was made choice of for this chcrge, wee earnestly re- 
commended Bishop Fullerton, as he was qualify'd for the trust, 
and in some respects entitled to it, being the senior Bishop of 
those now alive. In a short time the Bishops mett and, with the 
concurrence of the prysbyters of that diocess, made choice of 
him to be Bishop of Edinburgh ; and to encourage him the more 
cheerfully to undertake it, I engaged to g.ett a hundred pounds 
sterling per annum settled upon him by a certain number of well 
disposed persons, to enable him to bear the charges of living at 
Edinburgh ; which was accordingly performed. Tho the King- 
should have been acquainted of this choice, and his approbation 
obtaiii'd, yet because it was not adviseable to delay it, least the 
clergy had split and divided, it was thought sufficient that his 
trustees here did approve of it. However it was proper to com- 



36 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

municate this step to the King, and to desire he would write a 
letter to the clergy, recommending unity amongst themselves and 
obedience to their superiours, particularly to Bishop Fullerton, 
who was appointed Prime of the College of Bishops as well as 
Bishop of Edinburgh ; and accordingly I wrote the following 
letter on this subject and that of the trustees : 

" 25 April, 1720. 

" Sir Since my last to you I have seen almost all those peo- 
ple mention'd in your last letter to me, and to those few I did not 
see, I writt an account of your sentiments and resolutions. All 
of them highly approve the measure, and will cheirfully perform 
what is required of them ; but in regard there is not an imme- 
diate occasion for them to act, they think it proper to conceal 
the measure, untill the propaleing of it may be of use, least in 
the interim some people being inform'd therof, and finding them- 
selves not included, might perhaps be somewhat disgusted and 
doe a world of mischeif. This they desired me to communicate 
to you ; but the cheif reason of my troubling you at this time is 
the state of the Church. 

" You are not a stranger to the great honour and reputation 
the Scots episcopall clergy have justly gaind by their unshaken 
constancy and uninterrupted unity, from the commencement of 
their misfortunes to this time, and that the same may be in a great 
measure imputed to the prudent conduct of the late Bishop of 
Edinburgh. Now that he is dead, and no other of the old bishops 
alive, the care of the Church does naturally fall to those who of 
late years have, for the preserving of the succession, been con- 
secrated bishops, of which there are six now extant, and of these, 
Mr. Fullerton is the senior bishop ; and consequently it seems 
reasonable that he should have the preference and be appointed 
to act the part of the late Bishop of Edinburgh, to whom all the 
other bishops and the clergy, after the death of the Archbishop 
of St. Andrews, gave due obedience. And indeed it is very lucky 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 37 

that matters stand thus, for it is a question if any of the other 
bishops are so well qualifyd to discharge that trust ; but as he has 
not the advantage (as had the late Bishop of Edinburgh, by 
being virtute officii vicar general during the vacancie of the sea 
of St. Andrews) of any tittle to support his authority, it is thought 
this defect may be supplyd by a letter from you (to be communi- 
cated with all prudence and discretion to the clergy) intimating 
that as their unity and the regard they shewed to the late Bishop 
of Edinburgh did prove much for their honour and interest, you 
recommend to them the like conduct for the future, and particu- 
larly seeing Mr. Fullerton is the senior bishop and a person of 
known abilities and merit, that they would have regard to his 
opinion in all matters relating to the Church. This is the opinion 
of the Lord Balmerino, Lord Dun, and several others that look 
after your affairs, and it is by their express direction that I lay 
this proposal befor you, that if it is approved by you, you'l be 
pleased to transmitt such a letter to me as soon as possible, least 
difficulties arise and inconveniences happen ; especially seeing 
wee hear that Mr. Archibald Campbell (who, 'tho adorn'd with 
none of these qualifications requisite in a bishop, and remarkable 
for some things inconsistant with the character of a gentleman, 
was most imprudently consecrated some years agoe) is coming 
here from London, with a view of forming a party and propa- 
gating these doctrines which were at least unseasonably broached 
some few years agoe in England. As both clergy and laytie 
have a great regard for Bishop Fullerton and contempt of the 
other, it is probable he will make few proselyts ; however it is 
still fitt to provyde against the worst, and leave nothing undone 
to prevent a breach which would be attended with bad conse- 
quences with respect to both Crown and Mitre. If you ap- 
prove of what is here proposed, give me leave to sugest that it 
will be proper you signify your inclination that he should be 
added to the number of those you have appointed to inspect your 



38 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

affairs; and, for certain reasons, I could wish the Earl of Dal- 
housie was likewyse added ; he is a person of great honour and 
integrity, and the fittest perhaps in this part of the country to be 
at the head of an army, having been bred a souldier from his in* 
fancy, and a man of undoubted courage and resolution. Bishop 
Fullerton is come to town, and wee think it will be necessary 
that hence forwards he reside constantly there ; but as it Is un- 
reasonable he should be at so great a charge in serving the 
publick, 'tho he has a handsome little estate of his own, a certain 
number of people have resolved to contribute annually such a 
sum as will sufficiently enable him to support his character, and 
make up the odds of his living retiredly at home and publickly 
at Edinburgh. I am 

" Yours- &c." 

The King, as was proposed to him, quickly sent a letter lo 
Bishop Fullerton as follows : 

" Albano, June 12th, 1720. 

" The perfect knowledge I have, and the great sense 1 retain 
of the worth and loyallty of the Scots episcopal clergy, makes 
me at all times desireous to provydc as much as in me lies for what- 
ever may conduce to their honour and our rnutuall advantage. 
It was these sentiments that made me regrate the more sen- 
sibly the loss of the late Bishop of Edinburgh, who, besides liis 
personal singular merit, had for so many years, with an indefa- 
ticable zeal and application, both by his authority and example, 
entertained and supported among the clergy that union and at- 
tachement to my just cause which cannot but recommend them 
to all honest men, and much conduce both to their and my in- 
terest. I am sensible it is not easie to repare the great loss wee 
have made of him ; and on t'other hand I think it absolutly ne- 
cessary for our mutuall advantage that some one person should 
in some measure fill his place, by following lu's example towards 
the clergy, and receiving from them that deference and regard 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 39 

which t'other did. I know none so equall to such a trust and 
charge as yourself, and therfor I hope you will not grudge un- 
dertaking the trouble of it; and considering that our present 
circumstances render it impracticable to comply with certain 
forms, 1 am persuaded that my expressing here how much I desire 
that the Scots clergy should shew you the same respect and de- 
ference that they did to the Bishop of Edinburgh, will be suffi- 
cient to make them concurr with you in all matters which may 
tend to our mutuall advantage. I desire you will communicate 
this when convenient and needfull ; and when those concern 'd 
see the regard I have for the Church of Scotland, and the sense 
I have of their particular loyalty, I doubt not of their ready corn- 
plyance to what I propose only for the common good. You will 
sufficiently find by this the confidence and esteem I have for you ; 
I doe not fear being disappointed, and all I have in particular to 
recommend to you is, the preaching of union and charity botli 
to clergy and layty, since it is that alone that can with God's 
blessing make us see an end of our misfortunes : both while they 
last, and after it may please God to put a period to them, the 
wellfare of the Scots clergy I shall ever have at heart, as I shall 
at all times be desireous of shewing you the deep sense I have of 
your personall merit, and attachement to me and my just cause." 

I delivered the above letter to Bishop Fullerton, it being in- 
closed to me within the following letter* from the King, of the 
same date with the other. 

" I received yours of the 25th April some days agoe, and you 
will see by the inclosed letter how much I approve of the pro- 
posal you made me in the name of the Lord Balmerino, Lord Dun, 
and several more of those who look after my affairs. My letter 
on that subject is so full that I need not enlarge upon it here ; I 
hope it will give satisfaction, and if it takes effect, I am sure it 

* Received July 18, 1720. 



40 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

will be of advantage. It is my intention that Bishop Fullerton 
should be added to the number of those to whose care my affairs 
with you are more particularly recommended. This step I think 
both necessary and unavoidable, and I desire that you will com- 
municate it to him, since I could not mention this particular in 
my letter to himself, which will be shewn to so many persons. 
It was what I think no more than prudence required, to conceal 
at this time the confidence I placed of late in some of your hands ; 
and the same reasons which hinder'd your publishing that com- 
mission makes me think it not adviseable at this time to add any 
new person to it ; but this need not hinder you from saying all 
that is kind in my name to the Earl of Dalhousie, nor from con- 
sulting him in my affairs as occasion offers, with which he must 
be satisfy'd that it is particular reasons, and not want of confi- 
dence in him, which hinders my adding his name to the rest. I 
shall take it extreamly kindly of those who will enable Bishop 
Fullerton to support the expence his new character must putt him 
to, and which I would let no body doe but my self, did my pre- 
sent circumstances allow of my so doing. 

" I have now answer'd all the particulars of your letter, and 
was extream glad to find by it that some general directions I had 
lately sent had been approved of and were acceptable to the 
persons concern'd ; but it would appear to me that some letter of 
yours must have miscarried, for I received no other letter from 
you but that of the 25th of April since you received mine, 
which related to the particular directions above mention'd. Wee 
are come here into the country for a few weeks, and the Queen 
continues very well with her big belly ; which is all I shall say 
here, having nothing to add to a long letter I lately writ to 
Straiton. In whatever form you write to me, your letters will 
alwyse be agreeable ; I heartily wish you good health, and desire 
you may make my kind compliments to all friends with you. 
You may be alwyse assurd of my particular kindness." 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 41 

Within this letter (writt by his secretary and sign'd by himself) 
was a little notte, under the King's own hand, seald up in these 
words " I am very impatient to have your answer to what I 
wrote about Argyle; this would seem a proper juncture to press 
him closs on a certain point, and if he understood things right, 
lie would be easiely convinced that he would find his account in 
befriending me." 

Some little time after Bishop Fullerton was elected Prime and 
appointed to reside at Edinburgh, the College of Bishops sent an 
humble address to the King with an account of their proceedings, 
to which they had the following return : 

" Rome, July 2d, 1720. 

" Wee received with particular pleasure the first assurances 
you gave us of your loyalty, and of your affection to our person 
and family, by your address of the 5th of May. Wee have the 
deepest sense of the sufferings that the bishops and clergy of the 
Church of Scotland have undergone at all times for their firm 
adherence to our family, and will not fail to give them the 
strongest marks of our protection, gratitude, and esteem, when 
it shall please God to putt us in possession of our kingdoms. It 
is a satisfaction to us to know that the bishops who survived the 
unhappy revolution in our kingdoms, have promotled persons of 
your characters to their order ; and since the circumstances of 
past times have not permitted certain formes to be observed, wee 
think it proper hereby to approve of your promotion, in so far 
as our authority is necessary to it by the laws and constitution 
of that our ancient kingdom : but as to such future promotions 
as may be thought necessary for the preservation of your order, 
wee think it equally for our service, and that of your Church, that 
notwithstanding our present distance from you, you should pro- 
pose to us such persons as you may think most worthy to be raised 
to that dignity. Wee shall, you may be assured, have all possible 
regard for your opinion in such cases, and ever be willing to give 

VOL. II. G 



42 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

you marks of our favour and protection, and of our particular 
esteem for your persons." 

The Dutches of Perth having carried off her sons to France, 
so soon as she heard of the Duke their fathers death, I was desired 
by the friends of the family, and directed by some of the trustees, 
to write to Mr. Murray on that subject as follows : 

" August 2d, 1720. 

" Sir Yours came safe to my hands some days agoe ; as I need 
not tell you with what satisfaction I heard of my old friend's 
being well, neither need I insist on the pleasure that the King's 
freinds received from peruseing his letter to them, seeing it not 
only contain'd a good account of himself and his family, but 
likewyse some reasons to hope his affairs were on the mending 
hand, which in truth is as much wanted as earnestly desired. 
The troubles and crosses he meets with, are what he hath been 
too much accustomed to, and the natural consequences of having 
to deal with a sett of men whom no rules of honour or bonds of 
society can bind. However, as I will never doubt but sooner or 
latter, Providence will favour him, in all events my poor ende- 
vours shall never be wanting to doe him all the service I am ca- 
pable of, and I know nothing can contribute more towards re- 
dressing his injuries, than a good understanding amo.ngst all who 
are on his interest ; and I never will be persuaded that he who's 
directed by the smallest selfish view in the present state of affairs, 
can have the least title to be reputed an honest or loyall man, 
and therfor I must own that the accounts he gave of the harmony 
amongst his servants was extreamly agreeable to me, and gives 
great encouragement to all his friends, and the continuing therof 
should be recommended as the wnum necessarium. 

" The Kings affairs here at present afford very little for the 
subject of an epistle, matters being at a stand, and people waiting 
to see what arises from the present state of Europe. As for Bri- 
tain, tis plain there must be some very extraordinary turn, for, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 43 

as I take it, the Constitution is wholly subverted, the whole 
power being now lodged in the hands of the South-Sea Company, 
which is now become absolute masters of all the money, and 
have established such an interest, that King Lords and Commons 
joyntly or separatly are meer names. Many (and those for the 
most part little scrub fellows) are said to have made vast estates ; 
but for my part I cannot see thro it ; tis like a meditation, on 
eternity, that appears the more incomprehensible the more nar- 
rowly it is canvass'd. One thing is plain, the Company has no 
fund to pay at the rate of half a crown interest on the 100 pounds, 
as the stock is now sold at, nor is there, I beleive, as much 
species in Europe as what the stock is now screw'd up to ; so that 
how these new rich men will draw their effects, is more than I 
can see through, unless, as is talked and too probable, an act 
pass next parliament obliging the South-Sea bills to pass as 
specie ; and what confusion this in the event will occasion is very 
obvious. So that I doe conclude this stupenduous structure will 
terminate in some very extraordinary event, which at present 
noe man can foretell, only in so far that it may come to have a 
quite contrary effect from what is design'd by it. 

" Wee've now reason to think that the ensuing will be the last 
session of this Parliament, and all hands are already at work 
against the elections ; but I dont hear of any of the King's friends 
that resolve to concern themselves in the matter, so that the 
squable in Scotland will lye betwixt the Squadrone and Argyle. 
I had the honour of a visit the other day from the latter, and a 
long conversation with him, which may probably pave the way 
to talk more freely on other subjects ere long. 

" Those to whom the King has committed the inspection of 
his affairs, are extreamly glad he approves the method they take, 
and which they are resolved to follow out till an alteration will 
be of use in his affairs. Ther's one thing however I am directed 

G2 



44 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

to represent to you by some of them on whose judgement and 
experience in bussiness, as well as affection and zeal to the King 
ther's sufficient ground to rely, which is with respect to the pre- 
sent Duke of Perth. The concern which the King expresses for 
the loss of his worthy father, gives them reason to hope he will 
more readily harken to what is so necessary for the preservation 
of his family. To proceed then to the matter ; I suppose you 
know that about the very instant that the news of the father's 
death reach'd this, the mother went off in a ship with her son, 
without communicating her design to any of his relations, and 
is now with him in France, and this step is like to prove very 
prejudiciall both to the King and to that family. To the first, as 
it gives a handle to the Whigs to make a terrible outcry, that 
here is the heir of a noble family carryd off from his friends, and 
what may they not expect and dread from the Papists, were the 
King on the throne, when they presume to act after such a man- 
ner in the present situation of their affairs. As to the family, 
it will in all probability prove its utter ruin, for whilst matters 
stand thus, the valuable Logic will not take on him to act as 
tutor in law ; and ther's ground to beleive the Exchequer will 
putt it into the hands of a parcell of relations (such as Roxbur- 
row, &c.) who having other both particular and general views, 
will act in a manner that must have fatal consequences with 
respect to the heir and the clan. Besides, tis but too certain that 
they'r already beginning to whisper of Lundie's title as next pro- 
testant heir, and in all probability will, in due time, take the 
advantage of the law relative therto. The relations therfor of 
the family, and several of the King's trustees are, on these ac- 
counts, humbly of opinion, that the King could not doe a more 
popular action than to interest himself in this matter, and, by his 
interposition, prevail with those of the child's relations as are at 
Paris to send him back to Logic ; and t'is beleived they will not 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 45 

dare oppose or counteract the King's inclinations in the matter. 
At first view it may seem hard to desire and unreasonable to ex- 
pect the King should act such a part, seeing, no doubt, religion 
will be the pretence to justify what has been done. But, with 
submission, it may be putt on another bottom ; for here is a child 
(the custody of whom, by the present laws, belongs tp another, 
who alone, by his acting, is capable to preserve the family) taken 
or rather stolen away by his mother, who, without respect to 
religion, has no right or claim to the disposeing of his person ; 
so that the restoreing him to his tutor is no more than what is 
agreeable to the municipal laws of the land with respect to his 
civill interest. And as he is yong, he has time enough to think 
of choicing or at least deelareing his religion ; wheras if he 
continue where he is, all the advantages that can possibly arise 
to his unnatural relations will be taken, and perhaps a sequestra- 
tion follow, which, were he at home, could not be demanded and 
obtain'd till he be 1 5 years old ; and what may happen betwixt 
this and then, he's wiser than I lhat can tell. A great deal more 
than I have urged will occurr to you on considering the natural 
consequences of such an affair, and therfor 'tis recommended 
to you to lay it befor His Majestie. One thing I may affirm, that 
as the favour shewn to his protestant subjects, at Mr. Packing- 
tons interrment, was very agreeable to all his friends, and did 
him good service with the Church party in England, his inter- 
poseing and obtaining a just redress in this matter would be duely 
improven, and tend much to his advantage. 

" I have little more to add, but that wee long impatiently to 
hear of the Queen's delivery. Your frequently remember'd when 
your friends can meet togither. Bishop Fullerton is not yet come 
to reside in toun, but I expect him in a few weeks, and then 
I'll putt into his hands the King's letter, which can't fail to have 
the design'd good effects. I have no more to say to my good old 
friend but that I am entirely his." 



46 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

From Mr. Murray I gott this return * : 

" September 20th, 172O. 

" Sir I received yours a few days agoe, of the 2d of August, 
which was most agreeable to me, as every instance of your 
friendship and remembrance will alwyse be. The King is very 
well, and desires to be remember'd kindly to you and his other 
friends. Nothing can be more agreeable to him than a good 
understanding amongst his friends where you are, and he relys 
upon you as one who will use all friendly offices in order to it. 
Such of them as are here, I must say, agree as well as can be 
expected, 'tho I beleive, in the present situation of affairs, the 
King almost despairs of seeing all of them long pleased with 
any one he shall entrust more immediatly with his affairs ; which 
disposition is less or more incident to mankind in general, but 
more particularly to people in their circumstances. I need not 
say any more at present of this matter, because he is to write 
himself in a little time upon it, and to inform his friends of the 
measures that the necessity of his affairs will oblige him to take 
in that respect. As a friend of mine, I cannot hinder myself 
from letting you know that I have reason to hope they will be 
such as will no ways tend to my dishonour, and will extreamly 
contribute to my repose ; and I hope the concern you'r so good 
to have in what regards your old friend and servant, will make 
you share in this and every other thing which happens to his sa- 
tisfaction. 

" I have read your letter to the King, who, you may beleive, 
gave particular attention to that part of it which relates to the 
Duke of Perth. I shall state to you what has past as to this af- 
fair, and then I will leave i.t to you to judge, whither the King 
has not all along acted the most prudent and reasonable part in 
that matter. The Dutches carried her son to France upon orders 

* Received December 8, 1720. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 47 

she received from the late Duke whilst he was in Italy, which 
were renew'd by him from Spain. Upon her arrivall at Paris 
she wrote a letter to the King informing him of the steps 
she had made, and that it was in order to educate him in the 
inclinations of his father as to King and religion. The King 
return'd her a civill answer, thanking her kindly for her 
good endevours as to the first, but did not say one word to ap- 
prove of her intentions as to the second. Some time after, he 
was again writt to, upon an apprehension that King George 
might, at the desire of the Duke of Roxburrow, take measures 
to force the yong Duke back, and was entreated to use his en- 
devours in France to prevent it ; and 'tho, upon this representa- 
tion, there appeard a danger of his yong friend's falling into the 
hands the most disagreeable to him in the world, yet so care- 
full was he not to medle in any thing which concern'd the re- 
ligion of one of his friends, or which might indirectly approve 
of what the Dutchess has done, that he declin'd medlrng in the 
matter. Now, Sir, pray consider what can the King doe on 
-t'other hand, if it were reasonable for him to interpose now in 
an affair of which he has hitherto keept himself clear upon so 
good reasons. The Dutchess is now in Scotland, and in her ab- 
sence you may beleive no body at Paris can doe any thing, and 
if he should write to her, it would only procure an answer that 
her conscience was concern'd in that matter, to which you know 
he could make no reply ; so that from any measure of this kind 
he could not propose to be able to answer the intentions of the 
Duke's friends, and would break a rule he has established to 
him self, never to medle in what concerns the religion of any of 
his friends. He is concern'd to find from the account you give 
of this affair that the family is like to suffer, and would doe with 
particular pleasure any thing in his power to prevent it. He 
hopes the Dutchess will, upon the application of the friends of 
the family, doe what is reasonable upon this occasion ; but if she 



48 .REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

should not, it is hard the Duke should suffer by his friends being 
disobliged at the behaviour of a woman. He is peifectly well 
acquainted with the merit and worthy character of our valueable 
friend Logic, and he hopes, beside the tye of friendship and re- 
lation to the late Duke, it may be a strong motive with him to 
doe what he can for the present good of the yong Duke, when 
you tell him that he cannot possibly by any instance add more to 
the obligations the King has already to him. You'l be pleased 
to assure the Duke's friends of my earnest desire to have served 
lu'm and them upon this occasion, and of the King's being ready 
to have done every thing that was proper on his part ; but con- 
sidering the state of this affair, he hopes both you and they will 
be of opinion that it is not a thing he could have medled in very 
fittly, and that if he had interposed in it, there was no reasonable 
prospect of his being able to gratify the desire of the Dukes 
friends. 

" I have acldress'd this according to your directions, which was 
most reasonable, and shall continue to doe so, with what other 
I may have occasion to write to you ; after which I cannot but 
recommend it to you to be well with Captain Straiton, for you 
know he is an honest man, and in such, small infirmities are to be 
x>verlookt. All goes extreamly well as to the Queen, but there 
has been a considerable mistake, in so much that upon a consul- 
tation held a few days agoe, it seems almost certain that she will 
not be brought to bed befor the letter end of November at soonest. 
However, .a delay of two months is not material in a matter of 
that kind. I beg the favour of you to remember me to all friends, 
and to be persuaded with what esteem and respect I am &c." 

Upon the 22d of December 1720, and the 20th of January 
1721, I wrote two letters to Mr. Murray, wherof (having only 
reserv'd the heads and not compleat coppys) I here insert the 
substance. I acquainted him that the divisions and animosities 
amongst the King's servants abroad gave great pleasure and di- 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 49 

version to his and their enemies, and occasion'd much greif to 
his friends here ; that 'tho they had no regard to their King and 
countrys service, their own interest seem to require they should 
live in a friendly manner, for people here began to imagine that 
such ruptures must proceed from the want of either good sense 
and prudence or true loyalty and zeal for their Master, and en- 
tertain'd a very bad opinion of all who contributed to measures 
so pernicious to the King and his faithfull subjects ; and therfor 
I recommended above all things, that a strick friendship and good 
correspondence might be established amongst the loyal party at 
home and abroad, without which, people would have small en- 
couragement to engage with any tollerable view of success in 
the King's affairs. 

I told him that I had communicated his last letter to the Duke 
of Perth's friends, who were extreamly well satisfyd with the 
part which the King had acted, and desired me to return their 
most humble and dutifull thanks for the great honour he had 
done that family in the concern he had expresst for it. 

And wheras the King had not long agoe named Mr. Freebairn 
to be a bishop, and directed that he should be consecrated, I ac- 
quainted Mr. Murray that I found this step was not agreeable 
to, and approved of by the clergy, both on account of the per- 
son named and the manner of doing it ; that 'tho he was not 
under any bad character, they did not think him adorn'd with 
those qualifications of learning, good sense, and the like, so ne- 
cessary in one of that station, and that he was in no reputation 
amongst his brethren, or the layty of his communion ; that as 
the King at the distance he was, and from the little knowledge 
and experience he had of private mens character and circum- 
stances, could not judge thorowly so as to be sure of making a 
right choice, it was hoped that befor he proceeded to a nomina- 
tion, he would have consulted with the Bishops ; that as this me- 
thod would prevent his making 9. bad choice, it would endear 

VOL. n. H 



50 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

him much to the clergy, and be attended with this further bene 
fit, that it would prevent his being solicited and obliged perhaps 
to give denyalls, for were it known that he made no such pro- 
motions but by the advice and approbation of the Bishops, people 
would apply to them befor they presum'd to teaze him with soli- 
citations. And therfor I recommended to Mr. Murray to lay this 
befor the King, adding withall that he himself was so much the 
more bound to doe so, in regard he was generally blam'd for 
having advised the King to this step. 

Antony Osburn, an old acquaintance of Mr. Murray's and 
mine, was lately come to Scotland ; this gentleman was formerly 
an ensign in Orkneys regiment, bvit becoming very infirm and 
valetudinary, he left the service about some twenty years agoe, 
and lived closs at London ; he had no visible means of subsistance, 
yet after he recover'd his heallh, he lived and spent at a consider- 
able rate, 'tho no body could imagine how or from whence he 
was supplyd : he pretended and was beleived to be very well af- 
fected to the King, and keept much in company with the Tories, 
wherby I became well acquainted with him : lie wanted not parts 
nor a good share of assurance and cuning, and I never heard of 
any further communication with him, than whatpasstin common 
conversation with him, and toasting loyall healths over a bottle- 
About a year or two befor the Queen's death, his means of sub- 
sistance seem'd to fail him, for he was thrown into prison for debt, 
and remain'd there till she dyed, when all of a sudden he appear'd 
every day at St. James's. About the time of my writing to Mr. 
Murray, he came to Edinburgh, well equipt in cloaths, servants, 
and horses, and his pockets were full of money ; he took pains 
to gett acquainted with the King's friends, and dealt much with 
those of yonger years, to whom he pretended much zeal and 
great trust in the management of the King's affairs, was fond 
and inquisitive to know what was doing or could be done for 
in Scotland, exhorted people to exert themselves for him, 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 51 

and assured them of assistance. As soon as I understood that 
such was his behaviour at Edinburgh, I desired my friends to be 
upon their guard, and I gave him an oportunity to open his pack 
to me ; he keept much on generals for a long time, at length he 
told me, he was much trusted by the King's friends in England, 
particularly those who depended upon and keept a correspondence 
in England, with the Duke of Ormond, and he would answer 
for it, that wee should have 1 or 200000 pounds if that would 
enable us to make an attempt for the King in Scotland. I took 
him up very smartly, telling him I beleived he wisht the King- 
very well, but I could not understand how he came to be lett so 
much into the secret, that he knew I knew him too well to credit 
him, and I admir'd how he imagin'd such storys would pass with 
me, without shewing some credentials, and therfor I advised him 
to leave this place; for whatever his intentions were, I could as- 
sure him he would find himself disappointed : and indeed he took 
my advice, for not long after he went off to England, and what 
became of him afterwards I know not ; but as his story was very 
suspicious, I judged it proper to let Mr. Murray know of it, that 
the King might be on his guard, if he carried on any bad de- 
signs, and applyd to him or any about him : and I represented to 
Mr. Murray that as secrecy in all the Kings affairs was of the 
utmost importance, especially such as came thro the canal of his 
trustees, I desired such orders as should be transmitted to me 
might come directly to my self, and not thro Captain Straitons 
hands, because he was much faild of late and not so closs as 
formerly and is still necessary, and that I observed he was jealous 
and not well pleased that any person but himself was appointed 
to correspond directly with the King. 

In my second letter to Mr. Murray I told him I was inform'd 
by a good hand from Paris, that Seaforth, Tullibarden, and Pen- 
mure, having gott notticc of the powers granted by the King to 

H 2 



52 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

his trustees, were much displeased, and challenged Mar upon it; 
that His Grace denyd having any hand in it, affirming it was a 
measure which came originally from me, was proposed, in his 
absence, to the King by my son at Rome, and supported by him 
(Mr. Murray). I told him I had therupon writt a letter to a 
friend, Avho I knew would shew it to those noble Lords, wherin, 
after mentioning what I had heard of this affair, I said that 
people here were much surprized at the part the Kings subjects 
acted abroad ; that it was not enough that they must quarrell 
with one another, but even take upon them to judge of the 
King's measures, and approve or condemn as they listed ; that 
as for the measure they complain'd of, I own'd the part I acted 
in it, and if they would allow themselves to reflect, they could 
not but approve of it ; but be that as it will, the King's pleasure 
was enough to justify it, and should be acquiesced in by all who 
profess themselves his subjects, wheras repining and snarling at 
such steps as he thought fitt to take, lookt somewhat too selfish 
and assuming, and could not fail to give very odd impressions 
of them, whatever their professions or even actions and sufferings 
had been on former occasions. 

I proceeded then to tell Mr. Murray that I was directed by se- 
veral of the trustees, whom I named, to desire that he would 
entreat the King, from them, to make no bones of laying any 
number or all of them aside and supplying their rooms with 
others, if so be he perceived he could therby gratify those who 
were capable and willing to serve him, but were dissatisfy'd that 
others were preferr'd to them by the King, and they would, by 
their respect and obedience to what ever persons the King em- 
ploy'd, make it appear that as they had no design in accepting 
the honour he conferr'd upon them, but to doe him service, they 
were as ready to be directed as to give directions in the King's 
affairs ; but at the same time, if it was His Majesties pleasure to 



REGISTER OF LETTERS, 53 

continue his confidence in them, they would not decline his ser- 
vice from any hazard they might be exposed to from his enemies, 
nor the malice or envy of their own party. 

To these two letters I had the following returns from the King 
himself: 

" March 4th, 1721.* 

" It was some time since, that I received yours of the 22d of 
December to Murray, and as it required no speedy answer, and 
that I have nothing material to inform you of, I did not press my 
self in making a speedy return to it. 

" Murray left this place some weeks agoe, and I think you doe 
him but justice, in the good opinion you seem to have of him, 
as you doe it to your self by your impartiall and just way of 
thinking in some matters. 

" I hope I shall soon be able to appoint a secretary to succeed 
Mar, but on whosoever the choice falls, I can assure you, I my 
self shall be the best friend your country can have. 

" I am very glad Perth's friends are satisfied with my way of 
proceeding with relation to him. I have only in view the good 
of a deserving family, and shall alwyse take it kindly of any who 
contribute to it. 

" I thank you very kindly for the light you gave me in relation 
to the Scots bishops. There will be no occasion in haste of doing 
any thing in that respect, but it is my intention in those matters 
alwyse to act in concert with the bishops on the place, by which 
all inconveniencies will be avoided. 

" I see with concern that Scotland had a share in the common 
calamity as to money matters, in which I am very glad to find 
you had none. 

" As to what you mention in relation to Mr. Osburn, it is fitt 
you should know there is no such person employ'd by me, and I 

* Received June 12, 1721. 



54r REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

am pritty sure he is not by Ormond. So that the knowledge you 
have of that person's character and proceedings in Scotland can 
.only determine you as to the conduct which ought to be kept 
with him. 

" A little jealousie in an old man is pardonable, and if that 
should be the case of Straiten, you'l be much to be commended 
in bearing with it ; for there is no evill so great as any animosity 
or disunion amongst my friends, and I am persuaded thatStraiton 
is too reasonable to take any umbrage at our private correspon- 
dence ; for I must have to doe with all sorts of people, and make 
use of all canals which may contribute to the good of my service. 
I send this to Straiton, having no other way of addressing to you, 
but if you'l send me a private address I shall make use of it. o- 

" I am glad your son is come back safe to you : you have 
certainly reason to be well satisfyd with him, and he has but to 
continue to follow your example to make me so too. Pray say 
all that is kind to him in my name ; it will be a satisfaction to 
me to hear from you, when your conveniencie can allow it, for I 
have all the regard imaginable for your advice and opinion, and 
all the esteem and kindness for you, which you so justly deserve." 

" March 15th, 1721.* 

" Yours of the 2()th of January to Murray was communicated 
to me, and I thank you for the account you gave me of a private 
family concern, of which I had heard nothing before ; such acr 
counts of what comes to your knowledge will alwyse be proper 
and convenient, but neither you nor any other concern'd need 
be under the least uneasiness upon the particular you mention. 
There are alwyse bussie people, who, out of an itch to medle in 
bussiness, will be writing, and, may be, often commenting on 
what they hear, and Avhich is frequently said without much view 
or reflection, and therfor the less people with you jiottice such 

* Received J une 7, 1721. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 55 



informations may be the better, further than to communicate 
them to me, and to make proper use of such lights on occasions. 
However, I am far from disapproving- what you took care should 
be communicated to Seaforth &c. on this subject, and there is no 
doubt that it would be much the better for the common cause if 
all concern'd had your disinterested way of thinking, and if they 
attended more to its reall and solid advantage than to little per- 
sonal views, r tho I am apt to beleive in this particular, there has 
been more made of it, than it deserves. Pray assure my friends 
whom you mention to me on this occasion, how sensible I am of 
the message they sent me by your canal, and how much it in- 
creases the good opinion I have of them ; for as to the measures 
you heard had been found fault with, I doe not see any reason 
to change them, for I think they were taken on good grounds. 
v'. fc I doe not in the least doubt of the satisfaction my friends 
with you received on my late good fortune, which was the more 
pleasing to me, that I hope sooner or latter they may feel the 
good effects of it. 

" I hope this will come safe to you under James Cummings 
cover, to whom I will continue to address to you, and if you send 
your letters to me to William Dundass in Holland, directed to 
James Kelly, they will come safe to my hand. My family con- 
tinues very well, which is all I have to say to you at present, it 
being but about a week since I wrote to you. I am and ever 
shall be &c." 

I quickly communicated the contents of these letters to the 
trustees, who were highly pleased with the honour of being so 
much in the King's esteem. I also acquainted the Bishops, of 
that paragraph in the first letter which related to the Church, and 
they were ass well pleased with the resolution the King had 
taken ; and this part of the letter was afterwards of good use, 
when some difficultys occurr'd in consecrating Mr. Freebairn, in 
which the King seem'd very earnest, and took ill that it was so 



56 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

| 

long delayd. In the first letter was inclosed another design 'd for 
the publick, that is, for the King's friends in general. I caused 
make coppys therof and dispersed them over all the country, a 
coppy wherof is hereto subjoyn'd. 

" March 4th, 1721. 

" The increase of my family will, I am sure, have been agree- 
able news to you, and I thank God they continue all in very 
good health ; I wish I had as comfortable an accovmt to send you 
as to other matters, for the present situation of Europe is such, 
that it is not possible to form as yet any solid judgement of mat- 
ters ; I have many great and true friends both in France and 
Spain, and as soon as it shall be possible for these nations to 
think of forreign affairs, there is all the reason to hope that one 
or t'other, if not both, will find it their oun interest to befriend 
me, and in the mean time all means are useing to make such 
friends effectually usefull on a proper juncture. It is a melan- 
choly thing to be alwyse preaching patience, but I hope a very 
little more will serve, for it is not possible that affairs can long 
remain in the violent situation they are in, and it is not, I think* 
flattering ones self to beleive they will soon change for the better 
which is all I can say on these matters, and pray communicate as 
much to my friends with you, with many kind compliments in 
my name." 

In the year a bill was moved and past the House of Lords 

well known by the name of the Peerage Bill ; the purport was 
to restrain the Soveraign from exerceing the unlimited power of 
creating Peers of Great Britain or Lords of Parliament, and to 
suppress the representation of the Scots Peerage by sixteen elected 
by themselves, insteed wherof 25 Scots Peers (such as the Crown 
befor the dissolution of that Parliament should nominate) were 
to be vested with an hereditary right to them and their heirs to 
sit in Parliament. It cannot but seem strange the Crown ever 
consented to such a measure, seeing this restraint was a very 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 57 

X 

nottable diminution of the prerogative, and the election of six- 
teen Peers from Scotland seem'd to be the only article of the 
Union from which the Crown received any benefit, in regard the 
Soverain had a fair, nay almost a certain lay to gelt such sixteen 
elected as he recommended, and their election depending thus on 
his favour, served as an aweband over them when elected, and 
hindered them from kicking out and entering into measures dis- 
agreeable to him ; and it appear'd to be as little the interest of 
any Ministry or set of men in power, in so far as the restraining 
the royal prerogative was a lessening of the means by which 
they supported their interest against opposite factions. 

For clearing of this matter wee must call to mind, that King 
George knew little or nothing of his own personal interest or 
that of the Crown, and that he was entirely managed and di- 
rected by the Earl of Sunderland, who, at the same time, was 
powerfully supported by the favourite and predominant German 
Ladys and Ministry ; that this noble Lord (and these his sup- 
porters) was at open war with the Prince, who vowed and de- 
clared war against him if ever he came to the Crown. And as 
Sunderland made no doubt of being able to maintain his interest 
at Court during King George's life, he did not stand in need of 
recruits in the House of Lords to carry on his designs ; and if the 
Prince should survive his father, he reckon'd upon a great num- 
ber, so as to make a majority in the House, of his personal friends 
and such others as were in no better terms with the Prince than 
himself; wherby he would be in a condition to make a stand, if 
the then Soveraign was restrain'd from having it in his power to 
strenthen his interest by reinforcements of new created Peers, and 
was deprived of his trustee sixteen elected Scots Peers, 

This bill mett with a vigurous opposition in the House of Com* 
jnons, and, to the great surprize and disappointment of the Mi- 
nistry, was thrown out. The Tories opposed it as being an essen-r 
tjall alteration of the Constitution, by raiseing the power of tlje 

VP;L, 11, I 



58 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

present Peerage too far above tlie influence of the Royall prero- 
gative, and as it was an open violation of the articles of the 
Union, concluding that if this bill past, a precedent was laid 
down for subverting all or any part of the parliamentary consti- 
tution, and nnhingeing all or any of the articles of the Union ; 
and lastly that it was an indignity to the Commons of Great 
Britain, in so far as they were therby debarr'd from having such 
honours conferr'd upon them as the Soveraigne thought they de- 
served. The Prince again, being well enough apprised that he 
was struck at by this scheme, engaged all his friends and layd 
out money in forming a party against it, and so it was thrown 
out by a great majority. The- behaviour of the sixteen Scots 
Peers in concurring, nay zealously promotting a measure, which 
tended directly to raise themselves (for they to be sure had all of 
them assurance to be of the number of the elect) by striping their 
constituents of their rights and priviledges, is not to be past by, 
but always remembered to their infamy and disgrace. 

At the time this affair was in agitation (because it was openly 
told and certainly once design'd to renew the attempt in some 
subsequent session of this Parliament, in so far as concern'dthe 
Scots Peerage, which they did not question of being able to 
carry thorow) the King's friends in Scotland thought it a rare 
liandle to spirit up the Peers and raise in them a just resentment 
of the injustice and indignity design'd against them and their 
fkmilys. But it is scarce to be beleived what little impression it 
made upon many, who, one would have imagin'd, should have 
had the highest resentment, but were so simple and mean spirited 
as to credit and be carryd off by the promises of being named 
amongst the number of the happy five and twenty, so as to ap- 
prove at least not oppose the pernicious scandalous project. But, 
on the other hand, such of the Peers as had theservice of the King, 
or their own and their family's interest at heart, resolved openly 
to oppose it, and in order therto signd and sent up addresses to 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 59 

the two Houses of Parliament, asserting their right, and craving to 
be defended and supported in the exercise therof ; and this spirit 
continued for a considerable time, when at length, by the Marquis 
of Annandale's death, they had an occasion to shew themselves. 

Betwixt the time of this noble Lord's death and the issueing. 
a writt to elect one in his room, a whole session of Parliament 
interveen'd, during which no means were omitted to form a party 
and raise a spirit of opposition to the Court, and the Torie and 
other Lords who were against the Peerage Bill pitcht upon the 
Earl of Aberdeen. The first considered him as a person well 
disposed towards the King, and all of them as one of great ca- 
pacity and knowledge, particularly in the laws and constitution 
of the kingdom, and consequently most proper to oppose all 
further attempts against their rights and priviledges. The Duke 
of Argyle had of a long time affirm'd (very justly) that the 
Squadrone had no great interest in Scotland if they were not 
supported by the Court, and he proposed that he and they should 
be left to themselves, and allow'd a fair tryall of their interest 
and power at the approaching election, and therby make appear 
which had most to say in Scotland. To this proposal the Mi- 
nistry consented, and His Grace att first endevoured to have the 
Duke of Douglas or Earl of Morton elected ; but perceiving 
that the Squadrone, since they could not prevail in favours of 
one of their own stamp, rather than one recommended by and at- 
tached to him should be elected would vote for and therby carry 
Aberdeen, thought the next best course was to try if he could 
break and divide the Tories amongst themselves. The particulars 
of which affair, and of a treaty soon after set on foot betwixt His 
Grace and the Tories, being fully related in my following letter to 
the King, I need not repeat the same but referr to the letter itself. 

"/June 15th, 1721* 

" Sir I received yours of the 15th of March and in a few 
days therafter another bearing date the 4th of the same. What 



60 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

commands you laid on me I have executed ; and I can assure you 
all your friends are extreamly well satisfyd with your conduct, 
and think themselves very happy and highly indebted to you, 
that you are pleased to take the affairs of Scotland under your 
immediate care. 

" I send this as you order to Mr. Dundass, and if you please 
to address your letters to Mrs. Ann Mitchel, under cover to Mr. 
James Gumming, they'l be convy'd to me. I am master of 
Straitens numericall cypher, and will make some use therof in 
this as well as the alphabeticall one by which our correspondence 
lias been of late. 

" As your curiosity leads you to know what is a doing here, I 
beleive it will not be disagreeable to inform you of an affair that 
has made some noise. After Annandale's death, great pains were 
taken to spirit up the Peers, from a necessity of shewing a re- 
sentment against the Peerage Bill and other obvious causes. The 
Tories did resolve to set up Aberdeen, as one in whom they could 
confide. Argyle finding he could not carry one of his own de- 
pendants, because the Squadrone would rather favour Aberdeen 
than any friend of his, thought the best way he could take was 
to divide the Tories, and for that end made choice of Egling- 
ton, and he ('tho in the main a very honest man, and without de- 
signing to follow Argyle in Parliament) was unluckily prevaild 
with to accept of the invitation, by which means the Tories were 
divided, and made not near so good a figure as they would other- 
wyse have done and may alwyse doe, being more than able to 
cast the ballance betwixt Argyle and the Squadrone, and therby 
oblige some one of them to joyn in their measures at an election. 
However, so many did stick togither as to doe the bussiness and 
carry Aberdeen. The consequences to be dreaded of such a di- 
vision were of more moment than the thing it self; but it soon 
took a quite different turn, for next day after it was over, a par- 
ticular friend of Argyle's came to me and told me he was much 



REGISTER OF LETTERS^ 61 

surprized to find the Tories, and particularly my self, did preferr 
one for whom the Squadrone votted, to one recommended by 
Argyle. I answer'd that I alwyse preferr'd the general interest 
to private views, and I was sure no service was done to the Squa- 
drone, seeing Aberdeen would heartiely oppose them and was 
perhaps in Scotland the fittest man for it, ' But,' added I, ' if any 
thing wrong is done it is Argyle's fault: Why did he not offer terms 
to the Tories ? He replyd that was an omission, but he wanted 
to know if the Tories would yet accept of them. I answer'd I 
could not tell positively, but I thought they should and beleived 
they would ; and then he told me he was directed to ask the 
question at me, and desire I would negotiate it. This I readily 
undertook, and have made such advances therin, that I beleive 
if there be a new Parliament the Tories will have at least the 
half of the 16 Peers, and Argyles assistance where Tone Com- 
moners set up to be elected, seeing so far wee'r near agreed, 
being what Argyle, as matters stand, must come into, or suc- 
cumb to the Squadrone. I also insisted that matters should be 
made easie to those who were persecuted for the King's sake, and 
that Argyle should oppose the Peerage Bill, both which are ex- 
pressly agreed to. If matters can be adjusted thus, it cannot, I 
think, fail to have good consequences, especially seeing it paves 
the way to make a further progress with Argyle in higher mat- 
ters, which I must own I have much at heart on many accounts. 
In order to bring this scheme to answer, and to avoid all future 
mistakes and divisions, a good number of the Peers have so- 
lemnly engaged to stand by one another and in all matters sub- 
mitt to the opinion of the majority. These Peers are all much 
in your interest, and it is more than probable they'l soon prove 
a formidable body, and be able to rouse up a spirit towards ac- 
complishing matters of the greatest moment, in time; and I was 
particularly directed to acquaint you of this step, which its hoped 
you \vill approve of. If the treaty with Argyle goes on, I believe 



62 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

I shall be desired to goe soon to London to conclude it, 'which I 
will not decline, and shall not fail to let you know the result. 

(t The Duke of Hamilton is lately come home, and I think re- 
solved to stay, especially if there is any prospect of the Parliaments 
being dissolved, in which case he may be of great use ; for the 
truth on't is, since his father's death, your friends have suslain'd 
a very great prejudice, by the want of one in an eminent station 
to appear at their head and keep them togather, and for my part 
I can see none so fitt for that work as His Grace. Tis true he's 
yong and void of experience, but I am much mistaken if he is 
not entirely honest and a zealous friend to your interest, and it is 
obvious he wants neither spirit nor capacity. Some of his father's 
6ld friends have spoke very freely to him, and given him their 
best advice; and as he promises, and I hope will follow the same,. 
I am fully persuaded he will make a great figure. But after all, 
'tis necessary I acquaint you that wee find great difficultys in re-, 
concilingthe different humours of some persons with respect both 
to the necessary concert, and giving the encouragement that is 
proper to Hamilton, which I presume proceeds from envy and 
old family picques, 'tho these I hope will be removed in time, and 
give way to the publick interest. However, in order therto some 
of your friends are of opinion it would be of great service to the 
common cause, if you writ a letter recommending unanimity 
amongst the Tories (which might take its rise from your being 
inform'd of the late division in the matter of the election) and at 
the same time another letter to the Duke to encourage him in 
your service, in which case it is submitted to you, how far you 
would think it proper to add him to the number of your trustees, 
which I know he'll be fond of. If you approve of this, you'l be 
pleased to signify your orders therin to me in a letter by it self 
(because all the papers relating therto are in my custody) which 
I shall communicate to the Duke, and likwyse deliver the letter 
to him, if you send it by my canal. And here give me leave to 



REGISTER OF LETTER*. 63 

add, that some are likwyse of opinion you should signify in a 
letter to your trustees, or in one to me to be communicated to 
them, that as you are well satisfyd of the Duke's good intentions, 
you desire that they Avould give him all due encouragement, and 
support him in his endevours to advance your service. This, 
wee think, would give him a right to interpose with more autho- 
rity, where differences arise, and at the same time give no just 
ground for others to think he assumes too much. I have taken 
the liberty to express the terms in which such a message should 
be sent, because their's hazard in saying too much or too little. 

" And now, whilst I am on this subject, allow me to mention 
Tom Bruce, who lately, by his brother's death, is become Earl 
of Kincardine, whom in justice to your service and his merit I 
cannot pass by. This gentlemans zeal and sufferings for your 
interest is well known, and as I have been intimatly acquainted 
and corresponded with him these many years, I can bear testi- 
monie in a particular manner to his indefatigable zeal, this last 
year, in forming that unanimity which is so necessary for your 
service ; and as he is very well versed in the affairs and constitu- 
tion of both England and Scotland, and has a talent superior to 
most people in drawing of papers, I know no man so h'tt to be 
employcl in your affairs ; so that his being added to the number 
of your trustees will be of great use and agreeable to the rest ; 
but this I mention with all submission. 

" I had almost forgott to tell you that, by the direction of your 
friends here, I have writt to an old honest friend of mine at Lon- 
don, proposeing that the English Tories should appoint one of 
their number to correspond with the Scots Tories, that so they 
may understand one another's minds, and act in concert, and I 
hope in a little time to have an agreeable return. I find a great 
many very hopefull that wee'l have a new Parliament, and that 
the Torie interest will prevail, and in order therto have some 
thoughts of applying to you that you would use your interest 



64 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

with all your friends to take the oaths and vole at elections, and 
some proceeded so far as to desire me to write to you in these 
terms, which I told them I could not take upon me to doe. How- 
ever I thought fitt to let you know so much, and you'l consider 
how far it will be convenient to signify your pleasure therin, that 
according therto, the measure may be either advanced or sup- 
presst. 

" Upon the 10th of this month a parcell of boys, with more 
zeal than prudence, gott togather, having whyte roses in their 
hats, near to the Netherbow in the High Street of Edinburgh ; a 
file of musketeers was therupon sent for from the Cannongate 
guard, who, fireing up the streets, killd a man and a woman 
accidentally passing by, and indeed it was a wonder that many 
more were not killd, the streets being pritty full of people at 
that time. 'Tho this was done without any provocation and con- 
trary to all law, wee are not to expect any redress. 

" I have nothing more to trouble you with at present, but to 
communicate the great joy of your friends in hearing of the pro- 
spect of your familys increasing, seeing it cannot fail to be much 
to your satisfaction, and will in all probability turn to a good 
account. I conclud with the most unfeignd assurance of being 

to the utmost of my capacity 

" Your &c." 

To this letter I received the following return* from the King. 

"August 4th, 1721. 

" Yours of the 15th of June came safe to my hand, and I 
thank you very kindly for the particular accounts you give me in 
it. It is true I was not a little concerned at there having been on 
a late occasion some disunion amongst our friends, but 'tho they 
were of different opinions, I am persuaded they all meant and 
acted for the best, and at the next elections I hope Eglington 

* Received 28 Sept. 1721. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS, 65 

will be unanimously elected, for without any compliment to you, 
I have a particular regard to his worth and merit. It is much to 
be wisht that our friends may guard against any divisions amongst 
themselves for the future, for it is plain they can doe much if 
united, and that the contrary must greatly prejudice the common 
cause. 

" I think Very good use may be made of the transaction you 
mention in relation to Argyle, and it is very necessary that wee 
should draw all the advantage from it that wee can, but still 
proceed with such caution, as to be no lossers in the matter, if 
wee gain nothing by it. This negotiation will also give you na- 
turally some opportunity of speaking with that Duke on matters 
of greater importance, and if he once enters into any sort of 
union with my friends, he may, at long run and by degrees, be 
insensibly engaged in my cause, altho' at present he should only 
be moved by private interest or picque, and I doe not see any 
thing can so much contribute to bring this about, as the engage- 
ments of union which you mention that some of the Peers have 
entered into. 

" I am well inform'd of Hamilton's spirit and capacity, and 
well assured of his good will towards me ; and the credit and in- 
terest his family has long had in his own country must naturaly 
induce my friends to have the deference and regard for him, 
which he deserves and my service requires. A few days befor I 
received your letter, I had writt one to your part of the world re- 
commending unity amongst my friends, of which you will no 
doubt be inform'd, and you will find here inclosed a letter from 
me to Hamilton. As to his being added to the number of trustees, 
what is here said on the matter and what I here write to himself, 
answers that end effectually. 

" I send you here a letter to Kincardine, with whose zeal and 
capacity I have been long acquainted, and what I say to him 
will authorize him to act in concert with the other trustees, for 

VOL. II. K 



66 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

I am unwilling to add any more to their number, in any formal 
manner, to avoid disgusting others that might pretend to have 
the like done for them. It is perfectly right done to endevour to 
settle an union and a correspondence betwixt the Scots and 
English Tories, and I am persuaded both of them know their 
interest too well, not to enter readily into it. 

" I wish the poor people you mention to have been so mal- 
treated had been as prudent as zealous, for it afflicts me to think 
that people should suffer so much, and for what does no reall 
good to the cause. 

" As to our affairs on this side of the sea, all I need say is that 
nothing is neglected by me nor those employd by me, to enable 
us all to profitt of the present conjuncture, for I am very sensible 
wee can never have a more favourable one. I would fain hope 
my endevours will not alwyse prove unsuccessfull, and in the 
mean time I depend on the zeal and readiness of friends with you 
on all occasions, and earnestly recommend union to them, as the 
most necessary preparation for whatever may happen ; their in- 
terest and wellfare is what I have mainly at heart, and they may 
be assured that I shall ever have the most tender concern and 
regard for them. You will I know make the proper use of the 
contents of this letter, in saying also to my friends all that is 
kind in my name. 

" Our new landlord is very kind to us, and my family con- 
tinues, thank God, in very good health, and wee are now a few 
miles out of toun for the rest of the summer. I beleive I have 
tyred you with this long letter, and so shall conclude with many 
kind compliments to your son, and with the assurance of my 
particular confidence in and kindness for you, which your con- 
stant application to whatever may promote my service, so justly 
deserves." 

The King in this letter appears fond of the negotiation which 
I had represented as being pritty far advanced, and seeing the 



REGISTER OF BETTERS. 67 

event did not answer, it will not be amiss here once for allto 
take nottice that the above mention'd treaty carried on by me, 
and other treaties managed by Mr. Maul, with some of Argyle'.s 
friends, were keept on foot till the time that the election of a new 
Parliament approach'd, when the Ministry, however otherwyse 
divided, thought it necessary to use their joy nt authority to oblige 
Argyle and the Squadrone to unite their interests in the election 
of the sixteen Scots Peers; and in order therto a list was made 
up at Court, which they were required to support with their 
united interest, and admitt of no alteration whatsoever, which 
Argyle submitted to at last, being affraid to provoke the Mini- 
stry ; but had he been master of so much resolution as to have 
embarked with the Tories, he might have made a clean house of 
the Squadrone, and been able by his own interest, supported by 
the Tories, to have forced good terms from the Court. After what 
manner the intrigues were carried on with a view to the said 
election will appear from my letters to the King, which were so 
full that any other account is unnecessary. 

Betwixt the time of the Earl of Aberdeen's being elected and 
the ensuing election of Parliament, Captain Alexander Urquart 
came to Scotland. This gentleman was possess! of a small for- 
tune in the north of Scotland, had served most of his time in the 
army, and at lenth gott himself chosen to represent one of the 
northern districts of burrows in Parliament. He had a very fair 
character, and 'tho he never was in any station to make a figure or 
be of great use, he professt a great zeal for the King's service, and 
on being a Parliament man joyn'd with the Tories. He dealt much 
in the Stocks and made an immense estate during the South-Sea 
infatuation,. but neglected to sell out in time and preserve it: 
however whilst he was possesst of these imaginary riches, he told 
sevrall of his freinds, of his intention to give a substantiall proof 
of his loyal tie, by remitting 5000J. to the King; but before he 
performd it, the South-Sea scheme was demolished and he under 



68 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

an incapacity of making good his design. Whilst he sat in Par- 
liament he found means to be well known to the Earl of Sunder- 
land, who made professions to him of inclinations towards the 
King ; whither these were reall, and that he made choice of Ur- 
quart to be his confident, or if he aim'd at bambouziling the 
Torries with the hopes of gaining him, and imposed so far^n 
Urquart as to make him beleive he was in earnest, God only now 
knows, but so it is, that Urquart, who was then reckond a man 
of honour and well affected to the King, (tho his future con- 
duct gave too good reason to suspect he aimd more at serving 
the chief Minister than the Royall cause, seing on Sunderland's 
death he became as great a depender on the succeding Minister, 
and some circumstances were discovered that made it evident 
he served as a spy to Sunderland, and in so far Urquharts cha- 
ractar must suffer, unless lie had full certainty of that Lord's 
sincerity) when he, I say, came at this time to Scotland, where 
he had not been for many years befor, he applyd very earnestly 
to Kincardine, Mr. Maul and my self, endevouring under se- 
crecy to give us a good impression of Sunderlands designs, that 
wee might be therby induced to influence the Tories to favour 
his interest at the election of a new Parliament ; the particulars 
of what past on that subject being fully related in the following 
letter to the King, I referr therto. 

" December 5th, 1721. 

" I had the honour about five or six weeks agoe to receive 
yours of the 4th of August, and lost no time in delivering the 
letters therin containd. As I had occasion I communicated the 
contents of your letter to your friends, and I doubt not but what 
you design 'd and expected from thence will follow, all of them 
having a very just regard for your sentiments and inclinations. 
As it is agreeable to your commands and my "duty to acquaint 
you of every thing that I think for your service, either by way 
of information to your self, or in order to the having of your 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 69 

advice and directions, several things since my last have occurr'd, 
which in the opinion of Kincardine and Mr. Maul are judged 
very necessary to be laid befor you. 

" About the end of August Captain Urquart came to Edin- 
burgh from London, and being very earnest to have a conference 
with Kincardine, Mr. Maul and my self, there were accordingly 
several meetings, where the present state and future views of 
publick affairs, particularly in so far as they might contribute to 
your service, were the main subject of the conversation, and 
Urquart seem'd very desireous that your friends would enter into 
measures with Sunderlimd, particularly with a view to the elec- 
tions of a new Parliament, insinuating that His Lordship would 
give them good terms, and that such a measure would be agree- 
able to you. As these gentlemen were infidels with respect to 
any good intentions from that Lord, at least much affraid of the 
danger of being imposed on, especially seeing they had no know- 
ledge of your sentiments, they gave small attention to this over- 
ture, wherupon Urquart, in confirmation of what lie affinn'd, 
and to gain more credit to his scheme, produced some papers 
under your own hand, wherin you take nottice of proposals being 
made by that Lord and approved of by you, remitting entirely 
to him the ways and means of bringing the same to bear. The 
perusal of these papers putt these gentlemen to a stand ; they 
were unwilling, without knowing more, to enter into this mea- 
sure, and at the same time desirous to keep the game open, in 
case it should be thought expedient to follow it out, and therfor 
they replyd that they could not but require time to consider very 
seriously, befor they either agreed to or rejected proposals of such 
consequence, but withall they told him there were two things 
they insisted on as a necessary preliminary, without which, they 
were sure, none of your friends would ever have any dealings 
with that Lord, viz. that the present Parliament be dissolved, and 
that the Peerage bill be not reassumed. This he promised to 



70 RECISTEU OF LETTERS. 

report and make a right use of, and now wee are told that a new 
Parliament will be call'd, and tliat the Peerage bill is altogither 
laid asside ; but how far what these gentlemen thus represented 
and insisted on hath had any influence on that Lord with regard 
to these matters, is what I can't presume to say. These gentle- 
men reflecting seriously on what had past in their conversation 
with Urquart, and being very desireous to know more, in order 
to the better regulating your friends conduct, put on me to make 
,a journey to England to meet and converse with Mr. Shippen ; I 
the more readily undertook it, in regard he was come to New- 
castle, and had intimated to me, that in consequence of the mea- 
sure I had proposed (wlierof I acquainted you in my last) of 
settling a correspondence 'twixt your Scots and English friends, 
these had approved of and directed him to correspond with me 
in name of the others, and he was therfor desireous wee should 
meet and adjust matters in order therto. And that being done } 
I took occasion to tell him that there had been advances made to 
your Scots friends by Argyle, and that wee did not doubt but 
the like would be done by Sunderland, but as wee resolved to 
advise with and act in concert with your English friends, wee 
desired to know, with which of the two sides wee should take 
up, seeing wee might have terms from either, and would have 
the ballance in our oun hands. And withall I suggested that I had 
heard a surmise ttrat Sunderland had made advances to the En- 
glish Tories. Mr. Shippen replyd it was very true that Sunder- 
land had done so, and particularly with great earnestness not 
long agoe ; but your friends beleiving this proceeded only from 
a view to support himself against Walpole, and fearing that he 
might afterwards betray them, and at the same time considering 
that the Tories were now pritty strong and like to encrease, that 
they were very popular and seern'd very stanch, and to have true 
notions as to the only means of releif, they did not think it ex- 
pedient to venture their reputation and interest in the hands of 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 7 I 

one in whom they had so little confidence, and besides did not 
know how far some of their number might be taken off the right 
scent, in case, as the consequence of such a conjunction, they 
found the sweet of power and preferments ; for which and the 
like reasons they had utterly rejected the proposall, resolving to 
enter into no concert with any of the two contending powers at 
Court, but to stick togither and wait till it pleased God some 
event might occurr, that would give them an occasion to doe 
you and the country service. And therfor Mr. Shippen was of 
opinion, your Scots friends need be under no difficulty with which 
of the partys to joyn in matters of elections, but to determine 
themselves by closeing with the highest bidder. From what thus 
past betwixt Mr. Shippen and me, I could not gather that your 
friends in England had or were like to have any dealing with 
Sunderland. Whither the fact is in truth really so, or that he, 
ifi ease it is otherwyse, was not apprized therof, or so ty'd up 
that he could not communicate the same to me, I cannot deter- 
mine ; but as it was probable that one of his figure would know 
something of the measure ('tho perhaps not the primary rise) 
and that he, in that case, would have thought it at least expe- 
dient to drop some expression in favours of Sunderland in a 
matter of such moment as the elections, when I return'd to Scot- 
land and reported what past to the gentlemen that sent me, wee 
did not know how to reconcile the same with what wee had 
learn 'd from Urquart. But they were still more at a stand on 
the recept of my last letter from you, where, taking nottice of 
the advances I had acquainted you was made by Argyle, you 
seem to approve of your friends entering into measures with him 
and his party, on their giving reasonable terms, hoping at the 
same time such a transaction may pave the way for leading that 
Duke peice mail into measures of greater weight and importance. 
Now as 'tis no secret that his interest (especially when in con- 
junction with Walpole) is incompatible with that of Sunderland, 



72 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

from a review of Urquarts credentialls Mr. Shippens account of 
n\atters and this paragraph of your letter, these gentlemen arc 
at a loss what to think, or how to act, without runing the hazard 
of committing some blunder that may be prejudiciall to your ser- 
vice. For if so it be that you have dealings with and hopes cf 
Sunderland, it would seem expedient that he be supported; and 
on these and many such other obvious considerations, I was de- 
sired by these gentlemen to lay this matter fully befor you, in order 
to your giving such light and directions therin, as to you shall 
seem proper, and that with all the expedition possible, for till then, 
no measures can be laid doun, and time is now precious. They 
are far from presuming to desire or expect you should communi- 
cate to them the particulars of this or any such transaction, being 
sensible that it must be handled with the greatest nicety, at- 
tended probably with the greatest secrecy, but at the same time 
they thought it their duty ;to acquaint you of this matter, in case 
you should judge it proper to give any orders therin. And on 
that supposition they directed me with all submission to represent, 
that it would be managed in the most delicate manner, and that 
in their humble opinion, if so be you incline your Scots friends 
should favour Sunderlands interest at the ensuing elections, that 
without loss of time, you'd signify so much in a letter to the Duke 
of Hamilton, but withall that you drop nothing to him of any 
advice or information you have by this (for as Urquarts story, was 
imparted on promise of secrecy only to these three gentlemen 
for any thing they know, it is not h'tt that any besides your self 
should be apprized therof, and His Grace might perhaps take it 
amiss that a matter of this nature, and the resolution of communi- 
cating the same to you should be kcept from him) and that you 
require him to let none know that he receives this direction from 
you, but that 'tis a measure altogither of his oun, unless he rinds: 
an absolute and indispensable necessity to communicate your or- 
ders to some select persons (who perhaps would not otherwyse 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 73 

comply) on whose prudence and assurance of secrecy he can ab- 
solutly depend. You'l be pleased to consider how far you think 
it proper to give the gentlemen, at whose instance I write this, 
directions how to move, in case Urquart renews his application 
to them ; for seeing they were the only persons to whom he 
open'd his pack, and that tis probable the same was by the 
knowledge and allowance of Sunderland, tis presumeable, if he 
intends to proceed further, he may putt it in the same canal, and 
as matters stand now befor them, they will not know how to re- 
gulate themselves. But this is with all due deference to your 
better judgement, and only mention 'd in case you think they 
can be serviceable to you in such a negotiation, being fully ap- 
prized that an affair of this nature requires the greatest prudence, 
and to be entrusted to no more than what absolute necessity re- 
quires, till the scheme opens and the nail's to be struck at once 
to the head. 

" Your having mention'd my negotiation with Argyle, it 
will be proper I give you some account how that matter stands. 
You may remember I told you from the begining that secrecy 
was absolutly necessary, in regard I knew assuredly he would 
never treat with any body on that affair but your self; yet in a 
few days after I gott your instructions in that matter, I was in- 
form'd by good authority that Mr. Murray and his sister Mrs, 
Hay had been babling of it at Rome, and not long after that 
gave some hints therof to a certain person at Edinburgh, who 
from old picques or some other cause, could never be brought to 
beleive, or even, by what I could see, desire such a measure ac- 
complished. This alarm'd and surprized me exceedingly, and as 
I durst not venture to medle any further in it, untill I knew that 
the surmize therof was husht, I was even obliged to be at some 
pains to cause inform that gentleman, that being now convinced 
it was a chymericall project, I had dropt it altogither ; but by 
this time Argyle had entered into new measures and made up 

VOL. II. L 



74 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

matters witli the Ministry, and I did not think it convenient to 
make any steps therin till I saw further about me. However I 
am still hopefull it is not impossible to bring it about, for I know 
he is far from being well pleased or thinking his present a sure 
footing, and you may be assur'd I will lay hold on a proper oc- 
casion, if such ever again happen, beleiving it is the best service 
I can doe both partys in their several stations. 

" If the persons by whose direction I have writt this, from a 
zeal for your interest or a misapprehension of their duty have 
ventured to treat on affairs beyond their sphare, and which is not 
fitt to be communicated in whole or in part to them, they never- 
theless hope, the sincerity of their intentions will interpose and 
mediate their pardon, assuring you at the same time in the most 
solemn manner that nothing herein contain'd, or what they may 
be further apprized of in that matter shall goe further than their 
own breasts, or according to the instructions they receive from 
you, having in all their views nothing so much at heart as to 
evidence with how much truth and sincerity they are devoted to 
your service." 

To which letter I gott the following return, dated January 
31st 1722*. 

" I received your long letter of the 5th of December about ten 
days agoe, and thank you very kindly for the accounts you give 
me in it ; it is very true that Sunderland has to some people made, 
of late, a shew of wishing me well, . but I have never heard di- 
rectly from him my self, and have been far from having any par- 
ticular prooff of his sineerity, so that altho one who may be so 
essentially usefull ought to be managed and his friendship culti- 
vated if possible, yet as matters stand I doe not think it would 
be either prudent or adviseable to deliver our selves up entirely 
to him in the situation in which that particular affair is in at 

* Received March 18, 1722. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 75 

present ; and considering the distance I am at, I doe not think it 
adviseable for me to give my Scots freinds any positive direction 
as to their behaviour towards Sunderland, and I am sorry to find 
by what you say in relation to Argyle, that any negotiation with 
him seems to be more remote than it was, 'tho I think you should 
however have an eye that way, that nothing nor no body may be 
neglected, who may any ways serve to forward the good cause. 

" After this I think the conduct of my Scots freinds in the ap- 
proaching elections will be very easie ; let them cultivate a good 
understanding with my English friends ; let them act in con- 
junction with them, and have always in their view the choice of 
such persons who wish best to the cause ; and above all keep a 
strict union and unanimity amongst themselves ; by this conduct 
they will make themselves to be equally considerable and re- 
spected by all partys, and whither it be Argyle or Sunderland 
who wish me well, they will equally serve the purpose of one or 
t'other in that point, which ought only to be regarded. These 
are general rules which must be always observed, but the par- 
ticular application of them can only be made by those on the 
spot. 

" It may very well be that James Murray may have writt for- 
merly something to Scotland in relation to Argyle, but I beleive, 
on enquiry, you would not find it relative to what you had writt 
hither about him, for I never knew that person given to babling, 
and can be therfor very sure that nothing relating to that parti- 
cular secret was ever mentioned here by hirn or any body else. 
For women, I can assure you, are not trusted with any secrets 
here ; but as all bussiness is keept in a very narrow compass, it 
may very well be that those who may think they have a right to 
be let into it and are not, may write several storys, out of envy 
to those that are. Did I know your informer in this particular, I 
could judge better of the matter, but I think the best use to be 
made of such informations is to putt a mark upon the informer, 

L2 



76 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

that their little piques or jealousies may not create hereafter any 
jealousie or diffidence betwixt me and my friends. And it is 
only my concern to prevent any thing- that may tend to that, 
which has made me enlarge on this particular, which in it self I 
think deserves very little attention. I think I have ftow in general 
answer'd the contents of your letter. I shall conclude with re- 
turning you many thanks for the accounts you give me and the 
freindship you express for me, and to desire you and your two 
freinds to be assured of rny constant esteem and kindness for 
you." 

I took noltice befor that the King soon after the late Bishop of 
Edinburgh's death sent directions for having Mr. Freebairn con- 
secrated a bishop; but as the other Bishops did not approve of 
this choice, they delayd his consecration, some of them being 
obstinatly bent against him, both on account of his own cha- 
racter, and the way and manner of the King's naming him. At 
the same time, as the King had, in his letter to the Bishops, rer 
quired of them that they should acquaint him previous to any 
future promotions, and that they thought it expedient to have it 
in their power to add to their number as the service of the Church 
required, either by the death of any of the present number, or 
because of the divisions which they foresaw were like to happen, 
they writt to the King to desire his approbation of promotting 
Mr. Cant and Mr. Larnmie and obtain'd it. But as Freebairn 
w T as extreamly fond of the honour design'd him, and could not 
with patience bear a delay, he, or his son then at Rome, repre- 
sented to the King that the delay proceeded from an unwilling- 
ness in the Bishops to approve his taking upon him to name those 
that were to be Bishops of the Church, which the King took 
very ill, seeming no ways inclin'd to part with this right and 
priviledge of the Crown ; and care was taken to lett the Bishops 
and his trustees know he expected obedience. This putt the Bi- 
shops to a stand, and they resolved to advise with the trustees, 

. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 77 

who finding* that Freebairn had made no secret of his promo* 
tion, and fearing the performance, which probably could not be 
conceal'd, might provoke the Government and doe harm at this 
juncture, they thought it proper to delay the same, and directed 
me to write the following letter to the King. 

" March 12th, 1722. 

" I did my self the honour to write to you about three months 
agoe, and as your return, if no accident has happen'd, may come 
about this time, the same is as impatiently expected as it is very 
much wanted at this juncture. I am aflVaid I overdoe in what 
you was pleased to command, by writing and troubling you so 
frequently, but when you are immediatly concern'd in the sub- 
ject, I have the satisfaction of beleiving you'l easiely forgive me. 

" Some considerable time agoe you was pleased to name three 
persons to be bishops, and sent directions for their consecration. 
The College of Bishops in obedience therto melt frequently, but 
were always prevented, from executing your orders for reasons 
that to them seem'd unanswerable; but one of the three, not 
being satisfy'd with the delay, and pressing to be consecrated 
with the greatest earnestness and anxiety imaginable, the College 
was again lately conveen'd in order to putt some end or other to 
that matter ; where taking into their consideration, that from 
the present state of the times it was a matter of no small im- 
portance, and that a great deal of caution and prudence was re- 
quisite in a matter of that nature, and reflecting withall that the 
interests of Church and State are so blended togither as to be- 
come reciprocall, they thought fitt to ask the advice of such of 
your trustees to whom they could have access, befor they took 
any positive resolutions. And having accordingly layd the af- 
fair fully befor the Duke of Hamilton, the Lords Wigtoun, Kin- 
cardine, Balmerino and Dun, Mr. Maul and Master Paterson, 
they all with one consent and assent agreed, and gave it as their 
opinion and advice, that the consecration of any more bishops 



78 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

in the present state and circumstances of affairs (especially seeing 
the number in being was sufficient in all respects for the bussi- 
ness committed to them) would be prejudiciall to your service 
and the interest of the Church, and probably occasion much 
trouble and many difficultys, and that therfor a delay should be 
made therin, untill either you signifyd your express commands 
to the contrary, or the death of any of the present Bishops, or 
a happy scheme and turn of affairs gave them reason to think 
and act with other views. And as they are all very well assured 
that your sole intention in the forsaid nomination was to pro- 
mote the true and solid interest of your people, they hope you 
will not misconstruct their proceedings, form'd by the best advice, 
on grounds to them convincingly apparent to be suitable to your 
and the Church's interest and service at this criticall juncture. 
This in general I was desired to represent, and withall beg you 
would according to your wonted goodness admitt of no inter- 
pretation that may give you the least disgust at what is done 
with a sincere intention for your service, and the interest you 
have so much at heart. 

" Captain Urquart came lately to Edinburgh from London ; 
as he does not deny there is a closs correspondence betwixt him 
and Sunderland, he still insinuates that the latter is favourably 
disposed towards you, and wee hear His Lordship tryd to com- 
promize the election of the Scots Peers, having persuaded the 
Argyle and Squadrone partys to consent that four or five of the 
Tory Lords should be chosen, but that Tounsend and Walpole 
opposed it violently, and prevaild with their master to interpose 
and discharge it. In the mean time, methods are taken to su- 
perceed all final resolutions as long as possible, expecting to 
have some directions from you in return to what I did communi- 
cate to you in my last ; yet nevertheless it was thought necessary 
to lay the foundation of an opposition to the two partys united, 
and in order therto, the Duke of Hamilton wrote circular letters, 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 79 

and accordingly twenty seven Peers did lately meet logither at 
Edinburgh, where all but Tweedale sign'd a paper obliging 
themselves, under the strictest tyes of honour and conscience, not 
to vote at the insuing election, for any Peer who does not pre- 
viously give the like assurance and security that he will to the 
utmost of his power oppose the Peerage bill ; and it is expected 
a great many more Peers will come in to this concert, which 
its hopt may be the foundation of entering further into other 
measures and defeating the Court list ; and wee are setting the 
like measure on foot amongst the shires and burrows with suc- 
cess, which wee hope will turn to good account. Aberdeen has 
acted a part all this last session, and particularly on this occasion, 
highly to his honour ; for 'tho both partys offer'd and prest him 
to accept of being in their list, he told them that he was chosen 
by a sett of honest men his freinds, without whom he would enter 
into no measures, being resolved to stand and fall with them. 

" I have no more to trouble you with but that I am in the most 
respectfull manner your &c. 

" P. S. After writing the above letter, as I was just sending it 
off, yours of the 31st of January came to my hands; I therupon 
stopt this some days, that I might acquaint you that it came very 
oportunly (because the certainty of the Parliament being to be 
dissolved very soon, would admitt of no delay in thinking of mea- 
sures to be prosecuted with respect to the election of a new one) 
and that I immediatly did communicate the contents therof to the 
Duke of Hamilton and your other friends, who are now much more 
capable to determine themselves, and will improve all for the good 
of the cause. Next day after receiving yours a message came to 
Kincardine, Mr. Maul and my self from General Ross, acquaint- 
ing us that he would be at Edinburgh from London next day ? 
and earnestly desireing wee would meet and spend that even- 
ing with him; which being done he assured us that all sides 
were alarmed at the unanimity and concert of so many Peers, 



80 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

and that both partys would break off from the concerted Court 
list, if the Tories would joyn with any one to kick out the other, 
and he made some remote insinuations in favour of Argyle ; but 
in regard of the directions contain'd in your letter, wee keept 
aloof untill wee heard more, and from all quarters. Next day a 
particular friend of Argyle's came to me, asking if my friends 
would hear of terms from him. I answer'd that matter was well 
advanced several months agoe, just after Aberdeen's election 
(wherof I then acquainted you) but that Argyle had since 
slighted them, and had even agreed with the Sqviadrone in a list 
of Peers to be chosen, but that the Tories would look to them- 
selves and find friends else where. He reply 'd, that might well 
be, but nevertheless begd I woud endevour to keep the door 
open for some time, and sound my freinds inclinations on that 
point. I return'd that I should try to doe the first, but for the 
other I would not attempt it in the least unless I knew the terms, 
and thought they were such as would be acceptable. So this 
gentleman left me with an assurance I should hear soon from him, 
and he hoped to my satisfaction. At the same time the Squa- 
drone is in a way of trying the same course, as Mr. Maul and I 
could gather from the Lord Advocate's insinuations ; and you 
may depend upon it your friends will make as much as possible 
they can of the present posture of affairs for the benefit of the, 
common cause. Yesterday the Duke of Hamilton received a 
letter sign'd by nine of the most considerable English Torry 
Lords pressing all endevours to bring about a right election of 
the Peers, being very hopefull of doing something to good pur- 
pose and very agreeable next Parliament. I shall not fail to give 
you a full account how these transactions terminate, and what is 
the result of them." 

To this I had the following letter*: 

* Received August 28, 1722. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 81 

May 9th, 1722. 

w Yours of the 12th of March came safe to my hands, and I 
was glad to find by the postscript to it that my last to you was 
also arrived safe. By this time your elections will be all over, 
and I doubt not of your and your partners having behaved your- 
selves on that occasion in the manner that may be the most con- 
duceing to mine and your countrys interest. At this distance 
it is not possible for me to be giving particular directions, but I 
think in general that my friends bussiness is still to endevour to 
support the good cause, whither by joyning with any particular 
party, or by keeping by themselves, as they may think most 
proper or practicable ; and in all cases it is only a strick union 
amongst themselves which can make them considerable and use- 
full to me and their country. Aberdeen has acted a very honour- 
able part, and I'm persuaded he will always stick firm to his pre- 
sent principles. I'm pleased with the accounts you give, and ex- 
treamly sensible of the Duke of Hamiltons activity on the late 
occasion, and am no less of the continuance of the zeal of your 
other friends you mention. I am satisfyd Captain Urquart is a 
sincere well wisher of mine; but 'tho I know perhaps more of 
Sunderland than he does, I cannot say I think so favourably of 
him, and as I am far from having the least prooff of his sincerity, 
I think it would be not at all adviseable to putt our selves any 
manner of way in his power, or to depend so far on his friendship 
as to neglect other views ; but nevertheless considering the great 
use he may be of if he pleases, and that sooner or latter he may 
be sincere, it would certainly be equally imprudent to doe any 
thing to shock him or discourage him. 

" As to what you say about the Bishops, I never imagined 
there could be any difficulty about the consecration in respect of 
the present conjuncture, since two of the three were actually pro- 
posed to me by friends in your party. If there be any personal ob- 
jection against any of them, it is fill I should know it, and as I have 

VOL. II. M 



82 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

no other view but the common good, in medling with those mat- 
ters, I shall be far from expecting that any thing should be done 
in them that maybe made appear to me to be prejudicial to-it. 

" A little time will now shew us of what temper the new Par- 
liament is like to be, and which way affairs will turn after its 
meeting, and I would fain think that ere long, some favourable 
change may happen in our favours. You will easiely beleive I 
neglect nothing that depends on me to forward it, and therfor 
wee must always live in hopes, whatever may be the uncertainty 
of future events. You need not make any apologie for your 
writing so frequently, for your letters will be always most well- 
come as coming from one whom I sincerly value and esteem. 
My family continues in good health, as I hope this will find 
yours, being sincerly Yours." 

When it was certain that the old Parliament would be dis* 
solved, Kincardine, Mr. Maul and I resided closs in Edinburgh, 
and had dayly conferences about the proper measures to be taken 
at this juncture ; wee saw very few of the King's friends would 
stand candidates amongst the Commons, and the truth ont is wee 
thought it of no great importance, knowing well that few or 
none of them would be returned, 'tho elected by ever so great a 
majority. And it happen'd that the shiriffs made what returns 
they pleased even of the Whiggs. Such as were in the Crowns 
nomination return'd those the Ministry recommended, and those 
that were hereditary, as they stood severally affected to the Ar- 
gyle or Squadrone faction ; so that in a manner the Shirriffs and 
not the Barons or Burgess's made choice of the greatest part of 
the Scots members that went to the House of Commons. 

And as wee forsaw this would happen, wee bent our thought 
cheifly on the election of the Peers, which besydes seemd most 
material, in regard the House of Lords made a notable stand 
last session ; and to strenthen them with a right election from 
Scotland, was of the utmost importance. And in order to ao 

K . 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 83 

complish this, great pains were taken to spirit up the body of the 
nobility with a just abhorrence of the design'd Peerage bill, and 
manifest a suitable resentment against the last representation of 
the Scots Peerage in Parliament and all such other Peers as were 
accessary or even satisfy'd with that scandalous bill, and if any 
thing could make the body of the Scots Peers more infamous 
than their former conduct, the coolness of many in this would 
doe it ; for setting asside the manifest injustice that was design'd 
to so many noble familys, and the plain gross violation of the 
articles of the Union, it was as plain as the sun at noon day 
that this scheme, if effectuated, would render the Scots Peerage 
despicable, as it deprived them of the only small pittance left to 
make them valued and carressd by the Ministry. 

Yet the little present gain which some of them enjoy'd from 
places and pensions of no great value, influenced them to over- 
look the honour and interest of their posterity. However there 
was a goodly number who thought and acted a quite different part, 
and openly professed their resolution to gainstand the measure, 
and solemnly engaged to give their vote for no Peer that did not as 
solemnly engage to oppose any alteration of the representation of 
-the Scots Peerage (in which the Court Lords and Candidates posi- 
tively refused to give any satisfaction when it was demanded of 
them) but at the same time they delay'd coming to any resolution 
how or for whom they would vote, unlill they saw if any of the op- 
posite Court parlys would break off and come into measures with 
them ; and till the dyet of election drew near, both sides treated 
privatly, some with Mr. Maul and some with my self; but at 
last when it was perceived that the two partys would keep to- 
gither in obedience to the positive commands sent them from 
London, the Duke of Hamilton gott togither a select number of 
Lords and gentlemen well affected to the King, who thinking it 
highly necessary to let the world see that there was a considerable 
interest in Scotland opposite to the present Governments mea- 

M2 



84 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

sures, resolved that at the elections of countys and burrows, 
motions should be made for instructions to such as should be 
elected, and who should be required to give publick assurance 
to oppose the Peerage bill, and that addresses to the same pur- 
pose should be sign'd, with directions to be presented, if that af- 
fair was again moved in Parliament : and they further resolved 
that they would fix on a list of sixteen Peers for whom they would 
vote at the election in opposition to v the Court list, and that each 
of the Peers who agreed therto should, previous to his voting, 
enter a particular protestation in his own name against any al- 
teration of the representation of the Peerage, of what stands re- 
gulated by the articles of the Union. 

The election for the shyre of Edinburgh came first on, where 
I moved and carried instructions and an address in the terms 
concerted ; and coppys of the address being dispersed, the like 
measure was followed in most places, that therby the nations 
sentiments might appear. Most of the addresses being coppys 
or to the same purpose with that which I drew for the shyre of 
Edinburgh, it will not be amiss to subjoyn a coppy therof. 

" To the Honourable the Commons of Great Britain in Par- 
liament assembled. The Address of the Barons and Free- 
holders of the Shy re of Edinburgh mett in order to choice 
a Representative to Parliament, 
" Humbly sheweth, 

" That wee taking into our serious consideration, That, during 
the last Parliament, a design was laid to suppress the represen- 
tation of the Scots Peerage in Parliament ; and, instead therof, 
to vest in a certain number of Scots Peers and their descendents, 
the sole right and priviledge of sitting in Parliament ; and that 
a bill, to this effect, did pass in the House of Lords, and was from 
them sent doun to the late House of Commons : and being af- 
fraid that the attempt may be renewed in some subsequent ses- 
sion of Parliament, wee presume, by this application, humbly to 



BEGISTER OP LETTERS. 85 

remonstrate against it, First, Because the representation of the 
Peerage of Scotland, as it now stands regulated by the laws of 
the land, is a fundamental part of the Parliamentary Constitution 
of the United Kingdom ; and whoever assumes a right and power 
to suppress or innovate the same, may, by parity of reason, claim 
the like privilege, with respect to any other part or branch of 
the Parliamentary Constitution, in either of the two Houses : and 
consequently such a step will prove a precedent highly pernicious 
to the rights, liberties, and privileges of Great Britain. Secondly, 
Because the representation of the Peerage of Scotland, by sixteen 
chosen by the body of the Scots Peers, for that effect, being sti- 
pulated by the articles of Union, and declared so to remain un- 
alterable, in all time coming ; the subversion therof cannot be 
accomplished, without a manifest infringement of the said ar- 
ticles, and would prove a precedent for unhinging the faith and 
security of all the other articles of the said solemn treaty, parti- 
cularly in so far as concerns the representation of the Scots in the 
British Parliament ; for whoever can assume a power and right to 
dispense with what is stipulated in favour of the Scots Peerage, 
may also entirely cutt off' the representation of the Scots counties 
and burghs in the House of Commons, or make such alterations 
therin, as are diametrically opposite to the rights and priviledges 
of the freeholders and burgesses expressly reserved to them by 
the articles of Union. 

" On these, and many such other accounts, wee cannot but ap- 
prehend very dismall consequences attending so great an en- 
croachment on the Parliamentary Constitution, and so obvious a 
violation of that solemn, recent treaty, by which the two na- 
tions are united. And as the members of the Honourable House 
of Commons are the bulwarks and guardians of the British li- 
bertys, both national and personal, wee thought it incumbent 
on us to make this our humble remonstrance against a scheme 
BO illegall in its own nature, and which will prove a precedent 



86 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

for the most arbitrary, pernicious attempts. And as the late 
House of Commons did reject a bill of this nature, sent doun 
from the House of Lords, wee cannot doubt but you will show 
an equall zeal for maintaining the Parliamentary Constitution, on 
which depend the liberties of the people whom you represent, 
and preserving inviolably all and every part of that treaty, on 
the faith wherof the two independent kingdoms did unite, by dis- 
couraging and rejecting every motion and scheme, which doth 
.any way tend to infringe and violate the same ; 

" And your Petitioners shall ever pray &c." 
The Peers haveing adjusted their list and protestations, when 
they came to reckon up their numbers, it was evident they had 
a majority on their side, if all the Tory Lords would have com- 
plyd and taken the oaths ; for several Lords, such as the Earls 
of Glencairn, Balcarross, Broadalbin, Dunmore and Portmore 
were willing to joyn if so be, by their joyning, a majority would 
follow ; but unless that was made evident, they did not incline, 
by disobliging the Ministry, to loss the posts they enjoyd and at 
the same time fail in the main point. But as eleven of the Tony 
Lords would riot come in, and therby have made a certain ma- 
jority, the forsaid Lords voted with the Court. However those 
Torry Lords that thought it expedient to make a stand, continued 
in the same sentiments to the end, and accordingly voted and 
protested at the election. What is above narrated, and my letter 
which I sent to the King, will give a full enough account of this 
transaction, and therfor I proceed to add a coppy therof, 

" April 23d, 1722. 

" Sir, In my last bearing date the 12th of March I promised 
you a further account of the elections of this country. From a 
reflection of the tempers of the several partys, and some parti- 
cular circumstances at the time I wrote, there was reason to ima- 
gine some one of the two Court partys would, in opposition to 
the other, strike in with the Tories, but the commands of their 



REGISTER OF LETTERSk 87 

superiours were so peremptor that "tho each had all the inclination 
imaginable to undermine the other, they were cornpell'd in this sin- 
gle matter of the election of the Peers to unite and keep togither. 
The Tories however were not discouraged; they resolved to make 
a stand and shew they would not silently give up their rights, in 
order to which, one and twenty were present at the election and 
voted against the Court list, and each of them enter'd a protesta- 
tion against such as should be chosen assuming the libertv to dis- 
pose of their rights or alter the representation. The Court not 
expecting that a broken, harassd, dispers'd party could or would 
have dared to make such an opposition, were much alarmd, till 
they understood that eleven of the Torry Lords would not qualify; 
for had these come in and joynd the twenty one, there were so 
many more of those who, for private reasons, voted for the Court r 
-would gladly have corned off and joyn'd the Tories, when by this 
conjunction, it appear'd certain that they would be sufficiently 
able to throw out the Court list ; but when they saw that so great 
a number as eleven lay off, and that without them they could not 
make up a majority, they thought it needless to shew their teeth 
and when the consequences in that case would have been detri- 
mentall to them. The nonjurant Peers were Stormont, Blantyre, 
Strathmore, Kintore, Colvill, Strathallan, Hollo, Sinclair, We- 
myss, Arbuthnot and Pitsligoe. The Peers that would have come 
over from the Court were Glencairn &c. It was a pitty any thing- 
should have impeded such a general conjunction of persons think- 
ing and wishing after the same way, especially when ther's good 
grounds to believe the taking off the sixteen Scots Peers from the 
Court and adding them to the Tories, would have putt them in a 
capacity of doing good things next Parliament. The great re- 
putation Aberdeen gain'd by his behaviour in the House, and 
his refuseing to be in the Court list, obtain'd him so many drop- 
ing votes, from a great many who voted for that list, that lie 
was elected, to the no small satisfaction of all honest men ; for 



88 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

besides his acting a right part in publick mallei's, he is of sin- 
gular use in curbing Isla, who formerly look upon him to cult 
and carve in all Scots appeals, as the sole dictator and oracle of 
the Scots law in the House of Lords ; wheras Aberdeen keept 
him all last session within bounds, and was the protector of such 
Scots Tories as had affairs there, and did them very good service, 

" The Ministry were not only displeased at the opposition they 
metl with in the elections, but likwyse at the spirit which ap- 
pear'd against them throughout all the country. Tis true indeed 
few of the Tories are chosen, because they did not sell up for it; 
but had they stood timeously candidales they would have made a 
good appearance, 'tho al the rate the shirriffs have behaved, few 
or none would have been return'd ; for generally speaking they 
have return'd, both for shyres and towns, such persons as the Mi- 
nistry direcled, without having regard to law or juslice. How- 
ever, in mosl places, addresses against the Peerage bill were 
sign'd at the meetings for elections, and the persons chosen 
obliged publickly to engage lo oppose it, and endevour to have 
the trienniall elections restored. This measure was first sett on 
foot in the shyre of Edinburgh, as it was the first that elected 
and the most considerable shyre in this kingdom, and 'tho wee 
metl with all the opposition Ihe Minislry could give us, wee car- 
ried our poinl by a greal majorily ; and indeed Ihere appeard 
such a spiril amougsl the barons and freeholders against the pre- 
sent maxims and measures, that it had been very easie to have 
thrown out both the Argyle and Squadrone candidate ; in order 
to which I was prest the very morning of the eleclion lo offer my 
service, wilh assurance of being elecled, but that was what I 
did by no means incline to ; besides, about two years agoe, when 
the Commission of Enquiry was rampant, I gave the advocate 
something like an assurance that if he would preserve Mr. Basil 
Hamilton and some other honest mens estates from being for- 
faulted, I would take care so to manage matters that he should 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 8D 

be elected for this shyre in opposition to Mr. Baird, a creature of 
the Dalrymples ; and as the advocate did from thence forward act 
a friendly part to them, and that therto in a great measure the 
preservation of these familys is owing, I thought my self obliged 
in justice and honour to support him. Several of my friends, it 
being by no means fitt to communicate my private reasons to 
them, blam'd me for assisting the advocate, who is a man so 
capable to make a figure ; but I am hopfull you'l approve of my 
conduct, when you know it proceeded from so good a design and 
had so good effects. 

" I have latly had several oportunities to talk with the Duke 
of Argyle, but found him in a temper quite different from what 
I ever knew him. He seems to have a high resentment against 
the Tories, for adhereing to Aberdeen last year when he was 
elected ; he pretends the Tories are ungratfull to him, who pro- 
tected them when others inclind to be severe. I told him that 
charity begun at home, and he could not blame the Tories for 
favouring themselves in the first place; but I knew very well they 
liked him better than the Squadrone, against whom they would 
willingly have joynd with him, but that he slighted them and 
their assistance, even so far as to joyu with the Squadrone in a 
Court list of Peers; that I was surprised at this his conduct, 
being, as I had often told him, persuaded he would never be 
trusted by an English Whigg Ministry unless he sold his Scots 
estate and threw up his Scots interest, so as to become altogither 
an Englishman ; and 'tho he and Walpole were very well to- 
gither, it was only in odium tertii, and that if Walpole gott the 
better of Sunderland, he would retain the Squadrone, well know- 
ing they would serve or truckle under him or the devill for wages, 
wheras His Grace aim'd to be at the head of affairs, which Wal- 
pole would never allow ; but if he would sett himself at the head 
of the Tories, or enter into a private concert with them, I durst 
venture to assure him, he should make his own terms, and be 

VOL. II. N 



90 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

effectually supported, and this I signifyd not only out of regard 
to the Torry interest, which I professt, but as His Grace's friend 
who wisht him personally well and would gladly see him doe 
well. Tho he well enough understood what I meant, he made 
as if he did not understand me, and keept off upon generals, and 
as I could perceive he was buoyd up with the hopes that Walpole 
and he would gett the better of Sunderland and the Squadrone, 
I did not think it convenient to explain my self further, till I saw 
him better prepared to receive what I might urge, which indeed 
I fear will not happen so long as he can see a way to gratify his 
ambition from another quarter. However I shall not fail to im- 
prove every oportunity that may cast up for treating with him. 

" Now that the elections are over, your friends here have 
scarce any feild to work in for your service, whilst affairs are in 
the present situation : what turn they may take, and what releif 
God in his good providence will send, time must determine, and 
with patience be expected. If in the interim any thing worth 
your knowing occurrs, I shall not fail to give you nottice, and 
your commands will always be acceptable to all your friends, 
and in a particular manner to Your &c." 

To which I had the following return*. 

" August 16th 1722. 

" It is now long since I received your letter of the 23 April, 
for which and the accounts you give me in it I should long agoe 
return'd you many thanks, had I not been affraid of being trou- 
blesome at that time to my friends, which will not I hope be the 
present case ; and that being, I should think I did both my self 
and them wrong, did I not now and then put them in mind of 
one who wishes them sincerly well, and who never ceases doing 
what little is in his power to serve them. Altho I have mett with 
several rubs in my way, yet I am not, I can assure you, the least 

* Received 25 November 1722. 

.U ..IOV 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 91 

discouraged by them, nor will be less intent on doing what is 
expected from me, and what I still hope to compass at last. 

" I desire you may be under no uneasieness on account of the 
particular you mention of your self, for that I am persuaded all 
your actions are directed by those principles of honour and affec- 
tion for me and my friends which you have exprest on all occa- 
sions, and none can judge so well of particulars as those on the 
place. I own to you I am not much surprized at the little hopes 
you have of drawing Argyle into our interest; wee ought not 
however to neglect any thing towards the gaining of him, the 
time may come in which he may think it his own interest, and it 
will certainly be always our to receive him. 

" You will have heard befor now that 1 am at present in the 
country, and it will be some weeks befor I relurn to toun ; both 
I and my family are in good health, I heartily wish it may be 
the same with yours, and shall give you no further trouble at 
present, but to desire you to continue me the favour of your cor- 
respondence and to be persuaded of the friendship and sincerity 
with which I am Your &c." 

Some time befor the election of this last Parliament, Captain 
Straiton was directed by the Duke of Mar to-try if he could raise 
a sum of money from the King's friends to be remitted to Generall 
Dillon in France for provycling of arms, and he procured a letter 
to Straiton from the King to the same purpose. Whither this 
was commited wholly to Straiton, with orders not to communi- 
cate the same to any of the King's trustees, I cannot tell, but so 
it is, that for several months he did negotiate it by himself, and 
at lenth sent to acquaint me of it, desireing I would sett about it 
also. I answer'd I had no directions from the King therin, and 
I would not run the hazard of medling in an affair to which I 
had no call, and wherin he had tamper'd so long and so much, 
that it was too probable it would be discover'd. What success 
he had I know not, but in general that he procur'd some money 

N 2 



92 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

(about two thousand pound I beleive) which was remitted by 
Mr. William Erskine, and occasion'd his being afterwards made 
prisoner and sent up to London, the Ministry having intercepted 
some letters which showd he had remitted money; but upon ex- 
amining him, they could make nothing of the story to his pre- 
judice. Tis pritty odd that in a matter of this kind the King or 
rather Mar should have only entrusted an infirm superannuated 
gentleman, and not sett his trustees about it, who were much 
more capable ; but so it is, that except to the Earl of Eglington 
(who therupon advanced 500J.) I doe not know that the least 
intimation therof was made to the trustees ; and in some years 
therafter it came to light, that all or part of this money was by 
Mar apply'd to other uses than that which was at first pretended, 
which it would appear he had from the begining in his view, 
from the clandestine ways taken to collect it. 

This money affair putts me in mind of a passage so much to 

the honour of Mr. Lows of Merchiston, that in justice to his 

memory I cannot pass by it. Some little time after the Spanish 

affair was over, I was desired to make a collection for some three 

or four officers that had come from France in order to joyn Lord 

Marshall aisd could not stay longer here with safty; amongst 

others I applyd to Mr. Lows who produced a purse of a hundred 

guineas, and frankly desired me to take what I pleased out of it, 

but I took no more than five. He then told me that he observed 

the service of the distrest Royall interest since the Revolution 

had often faild for want of money, that for his own share, 'tho 

he liked his money very well, his purse had never been shutt to 

any person suffering for the King or Church ; and as he seldom 

wanted money by him, he should always have a thousand guineas 

ready for the King's service, and he had so much confidence in 

me, that when I saw a filt occasion, if I would send to him, I 

should have that sum to be expended theron. I told him that it 

was a very generous offer, and I vvisht others the King's friends 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 93 

would follow his example, and I would be sure to let the King 
know it. But herein he interrupted me, and made me promise 
the contrary, saying that what he would doe, was only from a 
sense of his duty, and he desired neither thanks from the King 
nor praises from others. I have mention'd this particular to stand 
as an example to others and a reproach to some. 

The letter formerly mentioned, with regard to the persons the 
King had recommended to be Bishops, being communicated to 
the Bishop of Edinburgh and by him to his brethren, prevail'd 
with them to proceed immediatly to consecration, after which at 
their desire I writt the following letter to the King. 

" December 7th 1722. 

" Sir, I had the honour about a fortnight agoe to receive 
yours of the 16th of August, and I am hopfull that the reasons 
you are pleased to assign for your silence of late will likewyse 
plead my excuse in not making a return ere now to another 
bearing date 9th May which I gott some three months or therby 
agoe. The truth ont is that as all intercourse was stopt, people 
of my complection have been obliged to act very cautiously, for 
fear of falling into the snares were laid for us ; and hav ing no- 
thing of importance to communicate to you, I thought it proper 
to suspend our correspondence for some time. Besides, as I could 
discern you was not perfectly well pleased with the steps our Bi- 
shops did take with respect to the consecration of those you had 
named, I was unwilling to write untill I could say something to 
your satisfaction in that particular, and in order therto, as soon 
as I gott yours in summer last, I went and showed the paragraph 
therin, concerning that affair, to Bishops Fullerton, Miller, and 
Irvin, and prest them to loss no more time in performing what 
you expected from them. These I found all along very frank, 
but another of the College, Bishop Falconer (a man of great 
piety, learning and loyalty) was so affraid of the rights of the 
Church that he scrupled at your recommending Mr. Freebairn. 



94 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

I represented to him that this was a very improper time for him 
to enter into such disputes, and that lie had no reason to imagine 
you design'd to claim any other power than the laws of the land 
had expressly declared did belong to you, and which your Royall 
progenitors had exercised ; and to convince him that even that 
power would be tenderly used, and in such a manner as no real! 
prejudice could arise from thence, I laid befor the Bishops a part 
of a coppy of a letter I received from you a good time agoe, 
wherin you commanded me to acquaint them it was your inten- 
tion for the future not to name any to be consecrated untill you 
had the opinion and advice of the Bishops with regard to the 
qualifications and characters of the persons. This gave them all 
infinite satisfaction, and they desired me very lately to acquaint 
you, that if any person hath represented that they delay'd this 
affair out of disrespect to your pleasure a very great injury was 
done them, and that such representations must either proceed 
from gross ignorance or a malicious design to give you a bad im- 
pression of them : that as they have hitherto given evident proofts 
of their loyalty, they are determined in all their actions to be- 
have as becomes good and obedient subjects, and that they have, 
to the satisfaction of the inferiour clergy, consecrated Cant and 
Freebairn, and were sorry they could not prevail with Lammie 
to accept, as he was a person on many respects more capable 
than perhaps any other to have been usefull in that station to 
your and the Churches interest. 

" Tho this affair is now adjusted, ther's another in the feild, 
that if not very prudently and cautiously managed will be at- 
tended with very fatal consequences. You have heard no doubt 
of some contests of late years amongst the nonjuring English cler- 
gy, concerning some alterations that some of the number desired 
in the Liturgy and forms of Worship, which were driven so far 
as to occasion a great breacli amongst them, to the no small pre- 
judice and discredit of the whole party. Of those who sett up 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 95 

for alterations, two of our Scots Bishops, Campbell and Gatherer, 
made a considerable figure at London where they have resided 
these many years; and Falconer favoured them in Scotland, in the 
northern parts .wherof some of the layity began lately to think 
after the same manner ; and as the clergy, of all mankind, are 
most zealous to propagate and establish their oun schemes, Ga- 
therer, on ane invitation from some people of notte, is lately 
come to Edinburgh in order to his going north and heading that 
party. There have been several meetings of the Bishops, and 
all, but Falconer and Gedderer, are against all alterations or in- 
novations untill the Church and State are so happily restored and 
settled that such matters can be duely considered and legally de- 
termined. They think what is desired not so essentiall as to be 
laid in the ballance with the misconstructions their enemies will 
putt upon them, that they are now, at least but latly revived in 
this church, and not much approven of by a great majority of 
layity of their communion, and any thing that may occasion a 
difference of opinion and practice, cannot fail of very bad ef- 
fects with regard to that harmony which is so necessary both for 
your and the Churches interest, and hath been hitherto so in- 
violably maintaind, and seeing the body of the College of Bi- 
shops can by no means approve of what the other two advance 
and design to practise without any legall authority, as they therby 
shake off the obedience which they owe, they can in no sense 
excuse themselves of schism, and must answer for all the bad 
effects that such proceedings will have in the affairs of Church 
and State. Fullerlon and those of his sentiments taking this af- 
fair much to heart, desired the advice of such of your trustees as 
could be gott conveniently togither at Edinburgh, and by these 
I was t'other day directed to attend a full meeting of the College. 
Both partys endevoured, by the practice of the Fathers and the 
first ages of the Church, to justify themselves : but I stopt them 



96 nEGISTER OF LETTERS. 

short and told them it was none of rny province to judge of such 
points, that I was directed to wait upon them, and in your name 
to recommend unity and harmony and to avoid every thing that 
might give your and their enemies a handle to calumniate them, 
and in order therto that they singly would give that obedience to 
the College of Bishops which they expected from the laicks, and 
which indeed they could not contradict, without at the same time 
oppugning your authority, as the College of Bishops derived their 
present power of governing this Church from you ; that as I was 
sure they were all convinced of your good intentions towards 
them, I left them to judge what sense you must and would putt on 
any measure that had the least tendency to divide such of your 
subjects who had adhered to your interest, and what opinion the 
world would have of those who were the cheif instruments therof. 
After having said a great deal to show the bad effects of divisions 

D O 

at this juncture, Falconer and Gadderer professt a great deal of 
loyalty and zeal for you, and hoped that you would not rniscon- 
struct their endevours to accomplish what had no manner of 
concern with the State, or even the external government of the 
Church. I replyd that as the consequences of what they aim'd 
at would affect both Church and State, you had an immediate 
concern to interpose, and which I, as authorized by those you 
trusted with the management of your affairs, did accordinly doe : 
and I required them, as they would be answerable to you for all 
the bad effects that would follow, to move no further untill at 
least your pleasure was known to them. At these words I saw 
they were moved, and seem'd very desireous that no account 
should be sent to you. I told them I could give them no satisfac- 
tion in that matter, for that depended on your trustees, and they, 
I beleived, would regulate that matter as they saw the Bishops 
behaved. Mr. Fullerton next day told me that what I had repre- 
sented had made an impression on them, 'tho he was affraid it 



REGISTER OF LETTEftS. 9? 

would be hard to bring them to reason, I beg pardon for trou- 
bling' you with this long story, but as it is a matter which your 
friends here beleive is of great moment to your affairs^ and that 
I am afiraid there will be a necessity of laying the affair befor 
you, more fully and from better authority than from private 
hands such as mine, I reckon'd you'd be pleased to have some 
previous hints of it. As 'nothing is omitted to keep these people 
within reason, I am hopefull they'l at last succumb, but Should 
it be otherwyse, I doe verily beleive the least intimation from 
you, that you doe not approve of these steps at this season, will 
at least have such influence with the laity that few converts Mill 
be made, and therby discourage the undertaking. But how far 
this will be necessary 'and expedient, a little time and your own 
judgement after further information must determine. 

'""I have nothing else of any value to communicate to ydu. 
Your friends live pritty easiely here just now, but how long it 
may be so, God knows, being; by the repeal! of the Habeas Cor- 
pus, at the mercy of their enemies.-^- Wee have been pritty much 
in the dark as to all designs of late, and the truth is ther's no 
need nor great 1 curiosity to have secrets communicated to this 
part of the island, where wee want nothing, but a heartie con- 
currence of those in the Sduth, to bring matters soon about to 
our mutuall benefit. And when ever that happy circumstance 
can be obtain'd, I dare venture to say your interest in this part 
will appear to have rather gain'd than lost ground. In the mean 
time wee must exercise our patience and live in hopes that some- 
time or other God Almighty will releive us from our state of 
bondage, by redressing your injuries, towards accomplishing 
wherof, the tyes of self interest as well as those stronger motives' 
of duty and inclination towards you cannot fail to stirr up the 
utmost endevours of all your faithfull subject*, in which number' 
allow me to assure you no man is with more sincerity than 

Yours &c." 

VOL. II. O 



98 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Follows the King's answer* to my last letter. 

" April 5th 1723. 

" It is but a few days agoe since I received yours of the 7th 
December, which came by Holland, and as ther has been but 
too good reasons of late to avoide writing without necessity, wee 
ought neither of us to take amiss our having been less exact in 
our correspondence. But I hope wee shall be able to continue it 
mqre exactly for the time to come, altho' till the Habeas Corpus 
act takes place again, great caution will be necessary on all sides, 
for fear of giving the Government any handle of exerciseing the 
same severitys in Scotland, as they have done in England, where 
I am in great hopes that none will at least suffer more than by 
present confinement ; and on the whole, considering the present 
disposition of the nation, and the posture of affairs in Europe, 
I think wee have all reason to hope ere long for some favourable 
change. My endevours to hasten it are continual, and when the 
time comes, I cannot doubt of the heartie concurrence of my 
faithfull Scots subjects, for whom I have and ever shall have the 
most sincere and tender affection. 

" Pray let the Scots Bishops know how sensible I am of the 
message they sent me by you and of the regard they shewed to 
me in adding to their number the two I desired might be so ; and 
now wee understand one another rightly on that head, I hope 
wee shall be able to proceed in such matters for the future with 
mutuall satisfaction. I hope your and my other friends exhorta- 
tions to peace and unity amongst themselves will have had good 
effects, and indeed it must be very visible how prejudicial the 
contrary must be to the good cause at this time ; and on proper 
occasions you and they cannot doe me a better peice of service 
than in employing your credit towards so good and necessary a 
work, which is all I shall say on this head,, on which I was glad 

. * Received 28 May 1723. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 99 

to be inform'd by you, and hope there will be no more occasion 
to write about it. 

" I have nothing furder at present to mention to you, but the 
good health of my family, which I am sure will be acceptable 
news to you and all my other freinds, and shall therfor conclude 
with the assurance of my sincere and constant esteem and friend- 
ship for you." 

Bishop Gedderer, 'tho Falconer left him and submitted to the 
College, continuing to advance and propagate his usages, as he 
term'd them, in the northern countrys (where he made many 
prosylites) notwithstanding of the remonstrances of the College 
of Bishops against all innovations, the Bishops and Kings trus- 
tees, thinking it proper to lay the matter befor the King, directed 
me to write this letter to him : 

" May 21st 1723. 

" Sir, I have not heard from you since my last of the 7th of 
December ; whither your silence proceeds from a regard to the 
ticklishness of the times, or that my letter or your return has 
miscarried I cannot tell, but least mine has not reached your 
hands, it will be necessary on this occasion that I recapitulate a 

little what I mention'd in my last. [Here I need not relate 

what was mention'd in my former letter but proceed to what is 
new in this.] Since my last, Gadderer having gone to the North, 
and boldly contemn'd both the advices and orders of the College 
and your trustees, by openly advanceing his opinions, and prac- 
tiseing his usages, and having gain'd several of both clergy and 
laity over to his way of thinking, is in a fair way of creating a 
terrible schism, which cannot fail in having dismall effects, by 
dividing those that have hitherto lived cordially, and been ready 
to joyn hand in hand, for the service of the Church and State. 
The College of Bishops are inclin'd to delay, as long as possible, 
their proceeding to suspend Gadderer and such of the clergy as 
follow him, because they would gladly shun propaleing this un- 



100 REGISTER OF LETTER* 

happy division to the world, having at the same time too much 
reason to apprehend their authority, as matters stand, will not 
meet with the regard that is due to it. A good number of your 
trustees thought it incumbent on .them to lay this matter befor 
you, and withall directed me to offer their humble opinion that 
a letter from, you to -fcbe College (or .the Bishop of Edinburgh to 
be communicated to them) approving of their opposition .to all 
novelties at this juncture, and recommending to each of them 
singly, and to all the inferiour clergy to shew a regard and give 
due obedience to the authority and directions of the College, and 
to continue their utmost endevours by the most prudent methods 
to discourage and crush all practices tending to the contrary, as 
being pernicious to the interest of the Church and your service ; 
and that another letter to any of your trustees you please to be 
communicated to the rest intimating your disapproving such 
practices, and desireing them to acquaint your faithfull subjects, 
that you look upon such steps as most detrimental! to your ser- 
vice : your trustees I say are of opinion that two letters to this 
purpose would have very good effects even with many of the 
clergy, and tend very much to turn all the laity against those 
measures and the promotters of them, wherby in process of time 
they may be laid asside, and your friends live in that harmony 
and good understanding which hath been hitherto so much their 
honour, as is indeed indispensably necessary both for you and 
them. This their opinion I am charged to lay befor you with all 
submission, and what directions you are pleased to give them 
will be punctually followed. I am your &c." 

The College finding Gadderer slill persisted in acting contrary 
to their orders, resolved to cite him to appear befor them to 
answer for presuming to introduce any innovations of the wor- 
ship and ceremonies of the Church, without nay contrary to their 
reiterated orders, and to give an account on what ground and by 
what title he pretended to exerce the jurisdiction of a Bishop in 



REGISTER OP LETTERS, M3l 

the diocess of Aberdeen ; and as they knew he would not give 
obedience to their citation, they intended to suspend him. 'And 
this step -they thought necessary, because the enemies of the 
Church represented, that the Episcopal clergy were already 
making advances to Rome (seeing indeed many of Gadderers 
tenets, such as the mixture of the- cup, chrism, prayers for the 
dead &c., seem'd nearly allyd to those of that Church) and what 
might be expected if their popish King was on the thron : and 
as such surmises tended highly to the prejudice of both Church 
and King, the Bishops thought it incumbent on them to manifest 
their dislike of what gave their enemies such a handle against 
them. 

Here it will be expedient to show Gedderer a little more plainly 
in his proper colours, by exposeing the title on which he claim'd 
to act as Bishop of Aberdeen. Some two or three years agoe, the 
prysbyters in that diocess applyd to the College that they would 
appoint a bishop to preceed over them and reside with them. The 
Bishops fearing they would choice Doctor Gairns (who having 
publickly advanced Madam Bonguion's wild doctrines, was by 
no means fitt to be promotted) answer'd there was no need of 
consecrating a new bishop for that end, but if they the Prysby- 
ters would name any of the College that was agreeable to them 
he should be appointed to reside with them, if they (the Bishops) 
approved of him. The Prysbyters accordingly mett, and, to the 
surprize of every body, elected Mr. Arehbakl Campbell. The 
College upon nottice therof writt to Campbell signifying their 
being willing to approve of what was done, provyded he would 
promise under his hand to maintain and propagate noe doctrine 
or usage not practised and warranted by the cannons of this 
Church. To this, Campbell writt a most ridiculous impertinent 
answer, positively refuseing to give that satisfaction, and styling 
Bishop Fullerton pope, and Miller and Irvin his cardinals, of the 
Church of Scotland. This letter confirm'd the College in their. 



102 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

resolution not to approve of Campbell's repareing to Aberdeen, 
and therof acquainted the prysbyters. However Campbell, slight- 
ing the authority of the College, reckon'd himself cannonically 
elected by the prysbyters, and 'tho he came not from London to 
recide amongst them personally, he sent Gadderer with a com- 
mission to act as his vicar. Now as this was all the right and title 
that Gedderer could claim, the world may judge of him by his 
accepting of what is so illegall ; and the truth on't is, from his 
own and his associats in Scotland and England their conduct first 
and last in this matter, as they manifested a base contempt of the 
authority of the College of Bishops and the advices and entreaties 
of the King's friends, ther's too much reason to apprehend, they 
had some secret views and motives, which they did not think fitt 
to own, or that they were stirr'd up by some, who at the bottome 
had designs prejudicial to the King and Church. 

But now to return to the Bishops, who after having fully con- 
sidered the present slate of the Church, directed me to write to 
the King on that subject, the contents wherof I need not repeat, 
but referr to the letter which is hereto subjoynd. 

The late act of Parliament obliging all persons to take the oath 
of abjuration, sccm'd to be a matter of great moment, as it ex- 
posed the King's friends to great difficultys; such as did not com- 
ply were left at their enemies mercy; and those who did, were 
likely to be disesteem'd by those who did not, which could not 
fail to occasion a dryness at least, amongst people who in the 
main aim'd at the same things. Many, to obviate the penalties 
of the law, or to render themselves qualify'd to follow out their 
employments as lawyers or the like, enclined to comply, but wisht 
the taking of it might have its rise from a general measure con- 
certed by the leading men of the party. In all events it was 
thought proper that there should be a general measure and con- 
cert for preserving the unity and spirit of the party ; and for ob- 
taining therof, Mr. Maul (now, by the death of his brother, Earl 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 103 

of Panmure) Kincardine and I laid our selves out. The Duke 
of Hamilton was the only person fitt to undertake the calling of 
a meeting, because he had not yet taken the oaths himself, and 
that his rank and quality entitled him to call such persons as were 
judged proper to meet and concert togither. Wee apply'd again 
and again to him, but to no purpose, for 'tho he approved of the 
measure, he could not be persuaded to leave his country diversions 
and spend a few weeks in toun upon so pressing an occasion. 
Not being able to bring about such a meeting for laying down 
and taking joynt measures and therby maintaining the face of a 
party, wee judgd it more necessary to lay the affair fully befor 
the King, which I accordingly did. 

This matter of the oath will not allow me to pass by the in- 
famous scandalous behaviour of the Scots members in the House 
of Commons ; had they joyn'd when desired by the English mem- 
bers that were against it, they were more than enough to have 
thrown it out, but instead therof they joynd with the Court to 
impose it on England, and in revenge the English members ex- 
tended it to Scotland : for at first the bill was brought in and 
only design'd for England, and the Scots members trusting to 
the promises of the Court, that it should not, and slighting the 
threats of the English that it should be extended to Scotland, 
voted, all but three, for the bill, for which act of folly and knavery, 
this hardship was imposed upon their countrymen at home. 
Follows now my letter to the King on the forsaid subjects. 

" September 10th 1723. 

" Sir, Some few days after I dispatched my letters of the 
21st of May, I had the honour of yours of the 5th of April, and 
after having shewed it to such of your trustees as I could meet 
with, I was by them directed to lodge a coppy of that paragraph, 
which related to the Church, in one of the Bishops hands, and 
Lord Wigtoun made a tour thro Perth shyre and the adjacent 
countrys, and communicated the same to Lord Nairn, Drum- 



1 04 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

mond of Logic and several other honest gentlemen, with whom it 
had such good effects, that wee have reason to hope your pleasure 
and sentiments more fully express! on that subject, as was humbly 
proposed in my last, will effectually answer the end, and the 
more that Bishop Falconer is dead. For 'tho he outwardly pre- 
tended submission to the College, yet secretly he favoured and 
promoted the seeds of division, and there was too much reason 
to apprehend that he and Gedderer design'd very soon, without 
asking yours or the other Bishops approbation* to have conse- 
crated several other Bishops;, with a view of'strenthening and 
encreasing their party; haveiug in , order thertd drawn up a paper 
which was privatly dispersed, .wherhv they remonstrated against 
the declaration which the College, required of aU in: holy orders 
promising; to give obedience to their -present superioursqand not 
to propagate any innovations ; and in this paper was advanced 
severall odd maxims, . particularly that; the present Bishops of 
Scotland were all Bishops at large, and owed no 'subjection to; 
any other, or even lo^them all acting in: a collegiate body-, so- that 
each was at liberty .to exercise his -'spiritual! jurisdiction where 
and after what manner he pleased,; without being scontroulable 
by or accountable to any other power. As Falconer was much 
respected or rather reverenced - on account of his learning and 
piety, his opinion in these matters moved many to have a favour- 
able opinion of them, but now that he is dead, wee hope there 
will be less difficulty to keep them within due bounds. If- Camp- 
bell -come down, I beleivethe College will quickly suspend him, 
having sufficient grounds to- warraral such a step, besides -his 
promoting this schism. As- his> character is no ways suited to 
the station he was advanced 'to in the Church, since Falconer's 
death the College think it ^expedient to -make a further promotion 
of Bishops to be settled in' those countrys,, such as Fyfe, Angu* 
and j the Mairns over which he proceeded, and in such other 
places as Aberdeen hyre &; where Gedderer applys himself, to. 






REGISTER OF LETTERS. 105 

propagate his schism ; at least, seeing most of the present Bishops 
are men of a great age, they think it very necessary to have 
your allowance and direction to consecrate at such times as they 
shall see cause and think it expedient, a certain number of other 
persons. This they desired me to lay befor you, and withall pre- 
sume to recommend Mr. Norry minister at Dundee, Mr. Duncan 
minister at Kilbirnie, Mr. Ross minister at ; Cowpar, and Mr. 
Gordon minister at Elgin, as persons in all respects qualifyd for 
the trust, hoping you'l be pleased to authorize the consecration 
of all or such of them as they think convenient, and at such 
times as they judge proper. Some few days after I received this 
instruction, I was again call'd upon by two of the Bishops, who 
told me that the College had appointed them to acquaint me, that 
on further consideration of the state of affairs, and fresh account 
of Gedderers practices, they had resolved to cite him to appear 
befor them and answer for his presuming to assume the charge 
and exerce the office of Bishop of the Diocess of Aberdeen? 
without your or the College having approved and authoriz'd 
the same, and to introduce any alteration in the worship and 
ceremonies of the Church, not authorized by the cannons, with- 
out nay contrary to the express orders of the College ; and as 
they expected he would not appear, they, in that case, would 
suspend him. At the same time they foresaw insuperable diffi- 
cultys and inconveniencies that would attend the delay of one 
cloathed with authority to counteract Gadderer and inspect 
the affairs of the Church in the northern countrys, until! an 
answer to what is above represented could come from you, 
and that none of the present Bishops could undertake it, being 
either very infirm or altogither unacquainted with the tempers 
and characters of the people both clergy and laity in those 
places ; that therfor they thought it absolutly necessary to loss no 
time in consecrating a person and sending him to reside in these 
places ; but as they had a most profound respect for you, and a 

VOL. II. P 



\ 



106 REGISTER OF LETTERS4 

just regard for your authority, they would make no steps therin 
that might be any ways displeasing to you, which they hope 
might be prevented, if they represented the case to your trustees, 
and obtaind their allowance to proceed immediatly, in regard 
the present situation of affairs could not admitt of so long a de- 
lay as to know your pleasure ; and this they desired me to lay 
befor your trustees, and report tlieir opinion and directions in the 
matter. I mett accordingly with a good number of them, who 
from a conviction of the necessity of speedily performing what 
the College proposed, and in regard they had showd all due de- 
ference to your authority, did take upon them to approve the 
design, and directed me to acquaint the College therof, and that 
I should likwyse give you an account of what they had done, 
being iiopefull you will not disapprove of it, seeing it was really 
a case of necessity, and the application made to your trustees 
preserves your prerogative unviolated. If you are pleased to au- 
thorize the College to make the promotions they humbly propose, 
and to approve of what is done with respect to Mr. Norry (the 
person design'd to be consecrated immediatly) it will I believe 
be expedient that you write two letters to the College, one au- 
thorizing them to make the promotions in the manner -desired, 
the other approving of what they had done with respect to Nor- 
ry, therin taking nottice of the application made to your trustees, 
and of his consecration being hasten 'd without waiting for your 
previous direction, because of the inconveniencies attending a 
delay, and that therfor you approved of what was done, and of 
his taking upon him the government of the Church in the Diocess 
of Aberdeen and such other places as the College should think 
fitt to appoint. This authority from you will raise his credit and 
make him more regarded in those countrys where every thing that 
comes from you hath its due weight. Itook a proper occasion 
likewyse to acquaint Bishop Fullerton that tho I did not question 
his own and his brethrens regard for the royall authority, yet 

* ..ii 









REGISTER OF LETTERS. 107 

the step they were to make with respect to Norry, might perhaps 
be adduced many years after this as a precedent against it, seeing 
nothing would appear to show the method that was taken and 
the true cause of it, for which reason I proposed the College 
should write a letter to me, disclaiming any design of encroach- 
ing upon your prerogative, and shewing the reason of their pro- 
ceeding so hastily in that matter. He desired me to draw such 
a letter, which having done, he laid it befor his brethren, and 
return'd it to me sign'd with some few additions of their zeal and 
loyalty to you. This letter I shall keep for your service, least in 
any time coming men of unruly tempers make a bad use of what 
was truly done with no bad views and meeiiy from necessity. 

" It will not perhaps be displeasing that I subjoyn a coppy of 
this letter. ' Edinburgh, 24th August 1723. Sir, The represen- 
tation which the College of Bishops made to the King's trustees, as 
it convinced them of the necessity to loss no lime in consecrating 
speedily some proper person to repare to the North, to oppose 
and counteract Bishop <iecWerer8 unaccountable proceedings 
there, it will likwyse stand as a clear evidence of our profound 
respect for His Majesties royall prerogative, for tho w,ee were 
well assured of many irrepareable disadvantages attending a di- 
* reel application to the King, and having his pleasure theriu 
transmitted to us, yet wee unanimously resolved to advance .no 
steps therin unless, upon a representation of the matter, wee ob- 
tain'd his trustees consent and approbation, in regard to the 
present case of indispensible necessity. This wee bope will so 
much convince His Majestie that wee are far from having any 
views of lessening his royal authority, .that he will be graciously 
pleased to approve of what wee have done witih respect /to the 
consecration of Mr. Norry, who is a person well .affected to His 
Majesties person and government, and as you aje fully ; appriz;ed 
iwhat steps we made in this affair, wee beg ajad expect you 

> p 2 



108 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

will transmit! to His Majestie a just and full account therof, with 
an assurance of our heartie zeal for his service, and unalterable 
resolution to behave and demean our selves with that dutinill re- 
gard towards him which is suitable to the principles and doc- 
trine of the loyal orthodox Church of Scotland, and which we 
have hitherto maintained in the worst of times. This by the di- 
rection and in name of my collegues the other Bishops of our 
Church is subscribed by me who sincerly am, Sir, Your &c T- 
Sic sub. Jo. Bishop of Edinburgh.* 

" The late act of Parliament obligeing all persons to take the 
oaths to this government, or register the value of their real estates, 
is like to have very dismall effects ; for how far the penalty or 
mulct to be imposed on such as doe not comply will extend, no man 
can say ; but, as wee have reason to expect, matters will be driven 
as far as a furious set of men can devise. Some of your trustees 
have had several consultations on this subject, and so far they 
have concluded, that as general measures as possible be taken 
and followed out, which they are endeavouring to propogate, and 
are at pains to know what are peoples sentiments and resolutions, 
that so a general measure may be laid doun if possible. There 
are some who will expose themselves and their familys to the 
greatest hardships rather than qualify, but by what wee can 
gather, the greatest part incline to venture themselves in the 
hand of God rather than of such men as wee have to doe with* 
J tho at the same time they will stave it off to the last moment 
Some of good consideration are very desireous to have your ad- 
vice and directions ; I told them that was a subject I could not 
venture to write on to you, that I did not think they could ex- 
pect you would explain your self on that head, and the utmost 
they could desire from you was an intimation that what they 
might doe at this juncture and in this strait to preserve them- 
selves and their familys from ruin, would not induce you to. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 109 

suspect their loyalty and sincere attachment to your interest, 
when any oportunity offered for your service. Tho I would not 
accept of any direct commission to write to you on this subject, 
I thought it incumbent on me to let you know the state wee were 
in, and how I found people were inclin'd. One thing is plain ; 
if people act at random and without a rule and measure, many 
will comply and many stand out, and these too probably as 
formerly wiil value and reckon themselves more upright than 
the others, who on the other hand, as it is a certain truth univer- 
sally known, that their complyance will proceed altogither from 
a view of eviting the effects of persecution, and that they still will 
retain their zeal for your service, will think they are not to be 
less esteem'd and trusted. These different ways of reasoning,, 
according to the different passions and views of men, as they 
may occasion heats and divisions, ought by all means to be 
avoided and prevented. Having thus represented the present 
state, and what consequences may follow, you can best judge 
how far it is proper and convenient for you to interpose and give 
any directions or even signify your sentiments on so nice and 
critical a point. 

"As I have your commands to inform you of every thing wherin 
I judge your service may be concern'd, it is my duty to obey, 
especially seeing some of your friends thought it absolutly pro- 
per to let you know that they are inform'd by good hands of 
there being shrewd suspitions at London that Frazer of Bewfort 
hath of late regain'd the favour of the German ministry (from 
which not long agoe he was almost totaly secluded) by furnish- 
ing them with intelligence of most matters that pass at your 
Court or else where abroad relative to you and yours, and that 
this he procures by and thro the means of his friend Mr. Camp- 
bell of Glendarule. How far this last gentleman is justly or un- 
justly accused, no body here can tell ; the suspision is in few 
hands, and the intimation comes from persons who at the bot- 



110 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

tome are not enemies to you, and probably with an intention you 
should be apprized of it, and you know best what use to make 
therof. 

" I am also directed to inform you that some of your friends nay 
even of your trustees are at a loss what to think and how far to 
confide and correspond with the Duke of Mar. That one in his 
circumstances should have both personal friends and enemies, is 
no strange thing in this world. Those who act with an impar- 
tiall view for your service, doe w r hat they can to suppress storys 
and jealousies of your friends, and especially of one of so great a 
figure as that noble Lord. At the same time they have had no 
intimations of your sentiments concerning him since his confine- 
ment at Geneva, on which account many passages with respect 
to his conduct and your not confiding in him have since that time 
been asserted by people both at home and abroad, pretending to 
good authority for what they advanced. But what puz^ells us 
most is that part of the report of the committee of Parliament 
"concerning the conspiracy, which positively affirms tlat he re- 
ceived a pension from the Government, on the assurance v>f his 
being out of your service, and being usefull to the other. It is 
pritty odd that a committee of Parliament should take upon 
them in so publick a manner and in such express terms to assert 
-such a fact, if not true, and it is as odd that he has never yet 
been at the pains either by himself or his friends to wipe off the 
aspersion. And under those circumstances, some of yowr best 
and most significant friends are at a loss what to think, or bow 
to behave towards him and those that depend upon him in this 
country ; and therfor it is thought that it would be much to your 
friends satisfaction and your own service that you would be 
pleased (as you did formerly) to signify to them how far you 
till continue to entertain a good opinion of -him. 'Such -an in- 
timation in his favours (if he deserves it) would remove the sus- 
picions of some, and enable others to contradict nd silence Hhe 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 1 1\ 

storys and clamours of those who, from personal piques and party 
views, grasp at all occasions to asperse him. I earnestly beg and 
humbly hope you will beleive what I have mention'd of these two 
persons can and does proceed from no other motive but the obli- 
gation I think incumbent on me, from your commands and the 
trust reposed in me, impartially to acquaint you of what I or your 
friends conceive for your service to know. How far the suspi- 
cions of one or both of these persons are well or ill founded, no 
body here can tell, but it may be perhaps of use for you to know 
what is reported here on these and the like subjects, for regu- 
lating your own measures and removing ill grounded and un- 
warrantable jealousies amongst those that are well affected to 
you and your good cause. 

" From what I have observ'd in the Bishop of Rochester's tryall, 
it is not expedient for you to sign your letters with the same 

surname I direct mine to you. And therfor instead of be 

pleased to use in signing your letters to me for the future. 

" I am sorry to tell you that I think Captain Straiton very 
much faild of late, and that I am affraid he cannot last long. 

"1 wish what answers you return to this may be convey'd by 
sure and safe hands, for a discovery would have bad conse- 
quences. It is now high time to putt an end to this tedious let- 
ter by assuring you that I am with all imaginable truth and re- 
spect, Sir, Your &c. 

" P. S. The day befor I was to send this off, I received a letter 
from 'Bishop Fnllerton acquainting me that Gedderer having 
made some show of submission, ;the College did resolve to delay 
the consecration of Mr. Norry untill they knew your pleasure 
therin, and desired that, instead of Mr. Gordon, I should insert 
Mr. Ochterlonie, minister at Aberlemno, in the list of the persons 
they recommend. I have not time to transcribe this, and leave 
out what relates to Norrys being immediatly consecrated, so I 
beg you'd forgive this being writt by way of postscript and what 



**+ 






1 1 2 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

errors I may have committed in reduceing this letter into cyphers 
by being much straitned in time." 

In a few days after I dispatched this letter, I received the Kings 
answer to mine of the 21st of May last, of which I must observe 
that it is writt in a general style and not so closs to the subject 
as was proposed in my letter, and consequently of less signifi- 
cancy, seeing both the contending partys pretended they were 
in the right, and did desire to promote unity and peace, provyded 
their opponents would knock under. Whither this manner of 
writing proceeded from no design, or that the King did not in- 
cline expressly to condemn tenets and usages near a kin to those 
of his own Church (on which account I purposely shun'd in my 
letters to make mention of the particulars) I cannot pretend to 
determine. 

"August 20th 1723*. 

" Your letter of December last was so long on the road, that 
allho I answerd it without delay on the 5th of April, I doe not 
wonder you had not received that answer when you wrote yours 
of the 21st of May, which I only received a few days agoe, and 
am sorry to find by it, that those differences, you formerly men- 
tioned, still continue. But I hope the letter I here send you for 
the Scots Bishops will contribute to putt a speedy end to them, 
and it is most certain, if they doe continue, it must end in the 
utter destruction of the Church, for whose wellfare the rulers of 
it must certainly have a sincere regard ; and therfor I am per- 
suaded they will more willingly comply with what I desire of 
them. You will take the properest manner to have this letter 
delivered to them, and I desire you at the same time to commu- 
nicate it to some others of my friends of the laity, that they may 
joyn their endevours to mine in procuring that harmony and 
peace among the Scots Bishops, which is so necessary not only 

* Received 16 September 1723. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 113 

for the Church, but for the wellfare of the good cause, which I 
am sure you and my other friends of the laity have too much at 
heart not to doe all that lyes in your power towards the promo- 
ting it. I shall not repeat to you what I say in my letter to the 
Bishops, which I am sure will be satisfactory to them, and I hope 
I shall have no more occasion of writing on so disagreeable a 
subject. It is true I have avoided writing on any into Scotland 
for some time for fear of accidents which might happen in these 
times of trouble and inactivity, but you may be assured that my 
thoughts have still been equally and wholly taken up with what 
may conduce to the delivery and wellfare of my subjects, which I 
shall ever pursue by all means possible, and disappointments and 
delays must not discourage us, nor hinder us from trusting to good 
Providence, which never abandons honest men in a just cause. 
When you can write to me with safty I shall be always glad to 
hear from you, and I shall ever retain for you that true value 
and esteem which you deserve of me. Ther was no venturing 
to write the inclosed letter out of cypher, and as it is a paper 
which must be seen by several people, you will take care that 
the cypher it is writt in do not become too common." 
Follows a letter to the Scots Bishops from the King. 

"August 20th 1723. 

" It was not without concern that I heard some time agoe of 
some divisions and differences of opinions that were amongst 
you, and that concern is now much encreased by the accounts I 
have again received of the continuance of those variances which 
must be so distructive both to the Church and my interest, and 
therfor I cannot but hope that as all of you wish well to both, 
you would by this time in an amicable and friendly way putt an 
end to all past differences. But for fear you should not have 
been able as yet to doe so, I thought it necessary to write this let- 
ter to you, to recommend and indeed require of you, to loss no 
time in taking the most prudent and effectual measures, for the 

VOL. ii. 



114 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

establishing an entire union and peace amongst you, towards 
which I shall always be so desireous, as it is manifest our enemies 
will ever draw their advantages from the contrary. The many 
assurances I have given of favour and protection to the Church 
of Scotland ought to make my sentiments in that respect not 
doubtfull to you ; and the personal esteem and regard I have for 
your selves, will be much encrased'by your ready complyance 
with what I have desired of you." 

f f 1 

Follow two letters from the King in answer to mine of the 
10th of September 1723. 

'" November 24th 1723*. 

" Your letter of the 10th of September came safe to me, and I 
am much obliged to you for the continuance of your zeal and 
attention in all that relates to my service, and for your exactness 
in what relates to it, which I earnestly desire you to continue. 
By what I sent to you some weeks agoe, the College of Bishops 
will have seen my sincere regard for them and my concern for 
their wellfair, and they may be assured of my continuing in those 
sentimenls towards them, and that their late respectfull behaviour 
towards me (of which you now give me an account) will induce 
me yet more to concurr with them in whatever may be for their 
support and advantage ; but as my nomination of the persons 
they propose to be added to their number, doeth not seem now 
to press so much, I shall deferr for some weeks making any am- 
ple reply to that particular, and even to the rest'of; your letter, 
for I have no surer ways than those formerly used to convey my 
letters to you, and you are much in the right to apprehend the 
ill consequences of any discovery, besides that I hear some let- 
ters have been lately intercepted in England, and I think what 
wee ought cheifly to attend to at this time is not to give the Go- 
vernment the least handle of encreasing the persecution against 

* Received 12 July 1724^.. . 

.11 ..IO7 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 115 

the loyall party, but I hope long befor the end of the winter, I 
may be able with safty to write fully to you. In the mean time 
let my friends with you behave with the greatest prudence and 
caution on one hand, but let them, on t'other, keep up their 
hearts and good will, for Providence will, I hope, at last open a 
way for their deliverance, the hasting of which takes up all my 
thoughts and time. As their present sufferings are my greatest 
afflictions, my tenderness for them is inexpressible, and my en- 
devours for their releif shall be constant. Pray let such as you 
confide in, not be ignorant of these my sincere sentiments, and 
be assured that mine towards you are accompany'd with a sin- 
cere esteem and kindness. I earnestly recommend both to the 
clergy and laity a strict union amongst themselves. Of all evills, 
none can be so fatall as any division amongst the loyall party, 
and many things ought to be pass'd over, and suffered, rather 
than venture the least breach amongst those who are united in 
the same cause." 

The King's other letter*. 

" March 18th 1724. 

" Since my last to you of the 24th of November, there has hap- 
pen'd many great -changes in the world ; it is not easie to forsee 
what consequences they may be attended with, 'tho I hope and be- 
leive they will be with none contrary to my interest, and nothing 
shall be neglected by me to improve them to the best advantage 
towards what all of us equally desire. In this situation I have 
little to say to you, and that made me deferr so long returning 
you a more ample answer to yours of the 10th of September, 
especially since I had reason to beleive that a small delay could 
be of no prejudice to the College of Bishops. The paper enclosed 
will I hope fully satisfy them; you will deliver it to them and ex- 
plain at the same time that I thought it by no means adviseable 

Received 14 July 1724. 



1 1 (> REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

lo have a formal! paper sent over at this time, for fear of accidents, 
and that they may look on this as equally authentick. The open- 
ing of the English Parliament seems rather to denotte a cessation 
of persecution for the loyall party at this time, which I earnestly 
wish on all accounts, knowing that nothing will be capable of 
altering their zeat and affection for me. The best rule I can 
give you and my other friends for the present, as to correspond- 
ing with this side of the sea, is to address directly to my self. 
They are well acquainted how great my regard is to secrecy, 
cheifly on their account; it hath hitherto been with success, and 
shall, if possible, be redoubled for the time to come, being well 
apprized of the importance of it, so that by this means they may 
be entirely at ease on that head, as you may be of my continu- 
ance of my sincere esteem and friendship for you. 

" The family is all in good health ; wee have lost a very good 
friend of our landlord, but his death can have no great influence 
on the affairs of the family or company. Let my friends whom 
yovi converse with find here rny kind compliments." 

The King's letter to the Bishops. 

" March 18th 1724. 

" Mr. Lockhart did not fail to inform me in due time of the par- 
ticulars you were desireous I should be apprised of in relation to 
the Church of Scotland, and I was equally affected with concern 
for the want of union and harmony amongst you and your 
brethren, and with the deepest sense of gratitude and regard for 
the constant loyalty submission and attachment which you have 
express'd for me on this, and so many other occasions. My par- 
ticular esteem for your Body is well known to you, and your 
present behaviour towards me doeth justly increase it, and with 
it my concern for your wellfare and all that may contribute to 
your advantage, and to preserve amongst you peace and union 
which I most earnestly recommend unto you, as equally import- 
ant both for your selves and the good cause ; and therfor to give 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 117 

you a new proof of these my sentiments towards you and of my 
confidence in you, I hereby approve and authorize your adding 
to your number the four persons you propose to me for that ef- 
fect, viz. Mr. John Ouchterlonie, Mr. Robert Norie, Mr. Alex- 
ander Duncan, and Mr. James Ross, not doubting but that their 
principles of loyalty and affection to their country and my family 
are suitable to those other qualifications, which have made you 
think them worthy to be the rulers of a Church, the members 
of which have on so many occasions shewed themselves to be 
equally good patriots and good subjects. But as I am most tender 
of any thing that might in the least disturb your peace or give 
our adversaries any handle to exercise new cruelty towards you, 
and considering my present distance from you, I leave to your 
determination to delay the adding to your number the four above 
named persons, as long as you shall think fitt, to the end that by 
taking a proper time to make that step, it may be void of all in- 
convenience, and only tend to your advantage, as I intend and 
wish it may prove. The present circumstances and my just re- 
gard for your safty, would not allow of my writing to you in 
another form, but it is my intention that you should look on 
what is herein contain'd as authentick, and as sufficient to jus- 
tify with me your proceeding in consequence of it. And you 
may be always assured of my readiness and desire to favour and 
protect the Church of Scotland, and to show you the personall 
esteem and value I have for your selves." 

Follows a letter of mine to the King. 

"August 18, 1724. 

" Sir, In a few dayes after my dispatching my last of the 10th 
of September, I received yours of the 20th of August, and about 
six dayes agoe I received at the same time two other letters from 
you of very different dates, viz, the 24th of November and 18th 
of March last. 

" I have been so long silent, because in truth I had little or no- 



118 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

thing of any moment to communicate to you, and I was unwil- 
ling to trouble you untill I could say something of the effects of 
your severall letters, exhorting the clergy to peace and unity 
amongst themselves. And I have now the satisfaction to tell you, 
that I hope these matters are so adjusted, that you shall have no 
fnrder trouble from that quarter on that score. The Bishops have 
acted very prudently, for as they were resolved to maintain their 
authority, they at the same time shewed a readiness to adjust 
differences upon reasonable terms, which with your letters, forced 
Gedderer toisubmitt, 'tho at the same time he and his bretheren 
would never have adjusted matters, had not some of your trus- 
tees been present at their meetings, and by virtue of your au- 
thority interposed betwixt them. And I cannot but reckon it a 
peice of service done you, in regard the common enemie seem'd 
mightily pleased at the prospect of a division amongst those who 
were rcckond to have an attachment to you, and propogated a 
world of false storys, with an intent to blow the coal, and weaken 
the interest of the common cause. But now I hope theyr disap- 
pointed in this particular. Whilst 1 am on this subject, I can- 
not but observe and rejmite how unaccountable it is for men 

O 

that arc at, under, and in a state of persecution, to be so factious 
and divided amongst themselves, and yet this hath been and I 
beleive will be the case till the end of the world, especially 
amongst clergymen, whom it is not easie, under any circum- 
stances, to keeep in due bounds. Amongst the small number of our 
Scots Bishops, there's abundance of private views and self in- 
terest, which in a great measure is kcept lurking by the prudence 
and authority of their primus Mr. Fullerton; but on the event 
of his death (which, as he is of a great age and not very healthy, 
may happen too soon) it is easie to foresee, it will break out and 
have very bad consequences, particularly on the occasion of 
acting as primus during the interval of acquainting you of his 
death and receiving your commands as to the person you design 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 119 

to succeed him. Of the whole number, Mr. Irvine seems to be 
the most proper person. He's a gentleman of good sense and 
experience in bussiness, and by his joyning my Lord Dundee 
and Lord Kenmure, on which first account he was obliged to 
retire for several years to France, and lay long in prison after 
the unhappy action at Preston, his loyalty and zeal for your ser- 
vice are unexceptionable. The Viscount of Kylsyth and most of 
those now with you know him well, and will confirm what I say 
of him. Tho this person is certainly the fittest to succeed Mr. 
Fullerton, it would not be proper that you should nominate him 
or any other till the event happen. But it is the humble opinion 
of several of your trustees that it would tend much for preserving 
that peace and unity which you so much and on such good 
grounds doe recommend, if you would send a letter, directed to 
the Bishops, signifying that wheras you are at a great distance 
at present and cannot give such speedy directions on several mat- 
ters, as the importance of the subject often requires, and being 
sensible that many inconveniencies may arise to the Church of 
Scotland, if Mr. Fullerton the present primus should happen to 
dye, for want of one of the College duely authorized to supply 
the vacancie untill you have time and opportunity to name one 
to succeed him, that therfor you have sent previously this letter 
to be ready and delivered to the College of Bishops, on the event 
forsaid, and that you doe therby direct Bishop Irvine to reside 
at Edinburgh and preside in the College of Bishops, untill you 
name another to act and official as primus. Tis proposed that 
this letter should be keept so very secret, that none of the clergy, 
nor any other but those by whose directions I write this, should 
know of it, till the time of its being delivered, and its thought 
an expedient nay the only one, that will prevent the heats and 
divisions which will otherwyse infallibly happen, to the no small 
prejudice of your interest here; for as the Episcopal party, which 
dayly becomes more numerous, are all entirely devoted to you, 



120 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

and that in some measure you are in the actuall exercise of your 
regall power, in so far as they willingly follow your directions in 
what you require of them, it is certainly for your service to keep 
them entire and at one, in all matters civil or ecclesiastick; and 
whilst they are in this good temper, T am fond of every occasion 
that casts up for you to exercise your royall authority over so 
great a number of loyall subjects willing to receive your com- 
mands, least an interruption therof should make them, when they 
may and should appear for you, forgett their duty to you; it 
being a certain maxim that a remisness or backwardness therin 
often proceeds from being unaccustomed to it, and that an au- 
thority claimd and exercised, 'tho but in a small degree, is 
easier maintain'd and even enlarged to its proper extent, than 
where it has never existed, nor been in the least own'd and sub- 
mitted to. 

" I was pritty much puzled how to behave from that part of 
yours dated 1 8 of March, which directed all letters of bussiness 
to the other side of the sea to be address'd to your self, in regard 
it seem'd to be applyd to that part of mine dated 10th September 
concerning the Duke of Mar, and that when I communicated it 
to those few, who knew of my writing to you on that subject, 
they had the same apprehensions of it, and concluded that you 
did not approve Mar's conduct, and that he was no longer trusted 
by you. Nay the few that knew nothing of what I had writt, 
and to whom I told your directions in general terms (such as the 
Duke of Hamilton, Henry Straiten, and Mr. Gordon of Glen- 
bucket, because I did not know but they might write, and address 
these letters after another manner than you directed) these I say 
did putt the same construction on it. To the first I replyd that 
your words did not expressly carry that sense, and 'tho it should 
be true in fact, the method which you took in signifying your 
sentiments, besides many other obvious reasons, did show how 
unfittit was that any suspicions of that person were publick, in 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 121 

regard his falling off would be a prejudice to the reputation of 
your affairs; and if the suspicion was groundless, the propaleing 
of it would be an horrid act of unjustice to him. They all agreed 
with me, and resolved to take no manner of nottice of having any 
such jealousie. To the others I answer'd that I knew nothing of 
the matter, that I had received your orders and apprised them 
therof, and it was none of our bussiness to draw inferences, espe- 
cially when they were not founded upon good authority, and 
were prejudiciall to the common cause. In fine 1 resolved to 
communicate your orders even in general terms to very few, 
and those only such as I imagine may keep a correspondence 
abroad. 

" I have several times of late years informed you of Straiton's 
being very infirm and valetudinary, and the truth ont is, these 
seven years bypast, I would not have bought his life at as many 
months purchase, and it is more uncertain now than ever, having 
within these six months been cutt sixteen times of a fistula, the 
root wherof I hear is nevertheless still remaining, by which he 
is reduced to be a meer skeleton, and confined altogither to his 
bed, so that there is no humane probability of his lasting long. 
Some of your trustees mett lately to consider of a fitt person to 
recommend to you to succeed him in what bussiness you committ 
to him here, and they unanimously agreeing upon John Corsar, 
directed me to signify so much to you. His zeal, integrity and 
capacity are known to all your friends with you and here, and 
Glenbucket concurr'd in approving of him, as one that would 
be acceptable to himself and the Highlanders; and what makes 
him appear more fitt for that trust, he resides closs at Edinburgh, 
and hath been of late years much employ'd by Straiton to decy- 
pher his letters and convey his dispatches, and is therby in a 
great measure acquainted with his correspondents and the canal 
of conveying and receiving his intelligence. If you pitch upon 
this person or any other, tis submitted how far you think it ex- 

VOL. n. R 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 



peclient to advertise Straiton therof, and desire him to give that 
person such insight in your affairs, that in the event of his death 
or sickness, there may be no loss of time, or mistakes committed 
in the manageing of them. I beleive such an advertisement 
would come best from your self to the good old man. 

" Your friends in all corners long impatiently for good news, 
being heartily tyred of the present situation of affairs. I am with 
the utmost respect and deference Your &c. 

" P.S. Since writing of this letter Bishop Irvin was sent to me 
by a good number of his bretheren, to acquaint me that notwith- 
standing what they had clone for establishing peace and unity, 
they were informed some gentlemen in Angus were going about 
asking subscriptions to an address to the College, desireing they 
would consecrate and appoint Mr. Ratray of Craighall to be 
their Bishop; that as this gentleman (one indeed of a good fa- 
mily and estate, of great piety and learning and lately ordaincl 
a priest) was the main supporter of Gedderer and his party, they 
understood that the cheif promottors of this address were of the 
same stamp, and had the advanceing of his schemes in view, by 
this promotion, for which reason these Bishops were of opinion 
that he was most unfitt to be made a Bishop, least the peace and 
unity of the Church be further disturbed, and they resolved to 
answer the address after the following manner; That as there is 
at present a sett of Bishops sufficient for the service of the Church, 
the encreasing of the number would rather doe harm than good ; 
and that besides they neither can nor will proceed to consecrate 
him or any other person, but by your direction and under your 
authority. And having reason to apprehend that these address- 
ers design'd to apply to you, they desired me to acquaint you* 
they were humbly of opinion there was not the least occasion 
for adding any more to their number, and were it otherwyse, 
this gentleman is by no means, a fitt person to be promotted, in 
regard it could not fail to introduce divisions and discord, to 

.11 '. jcv 



REGISTER OF LETTERS; 123 

which they know you doe not incline to give the least encou- 
ragement and may easiely on this occasion avoid, by letting them 
know that in such matters you act by the advice of the College 
of Bishops." 

When Gadderer perceived the Bishops were determined to pro- 
ceed against him, and that some of the laity who had hitherto 
supported him, and most of those who seem'd indifferent in the 
contraversy were moved with the King's letters on that subject 
and began to discountenance him, he thought fitt to come to 
Edinburgh and submitt to the authority of the College, which 
mett upon that occasion, and where the Earls of Wigton, Pen- 
mure and Kincardine and my self were desired to be present to 
give our opinions and advice. Gadderer insisted much that the 
usages he introduced were practised by the primative Fathers, and 
tho he would not averr they were essentiall, yet he reckon 'd them 
as integrals in the worship of God, and thought himself indis- 
pensably obliged to use the mixture of water with wine in his 
administration of the holy eucharist, yet for peace sake he would 
bring himself to communicate with others, tho there was no such 
mixture. The other Bishops replyd that they lookt upon these 
usages as matters indifferent in themselves, but that their ene- 
mies made a bad use of their being introduced, for which reason 
they could not approve of them, and he (Gedderer) as being a 
son of the Church, should submitt to the authority of the College 
in all such matters as extended no furder than to rites and cere- 
monies, and the external government of the Church. However, 
to indulge his scrupulous conscience, they would make such con- 
cessions as they judged consistant with the interest of the Church, 
and ought to satisfy him. Accordingly articles of agreement 
were drawn up and signd by the whole College, the sum wherof 
was, that Gadderer therby engaged to introduce propogate or 
allow of no usages and ceremonies within his district that were 
not conform to the cannons and practice of the Church of 



124 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Scotland, excepting that of the mixture of the cup, which they 
(the other Bishops) were willing to connive at in him, pro- 
vyded he perform'd it only to those that demanded it and with 
such privacy and prudence, as not to give offence to others 
who startled at such innovations; and that he (Gedderer) did 
submitt himself to the power of the College in all matters, 
from whom alone he did acknowledge that he derived his au- 
thority to exercise the episcopal function and powers in his 
.diocess. So that here he gave up his friend and patron Mr. 
Campbell, who was not a little nettled at it and pretended still 
to have the only legall tittle to be Bishop of Aberdeen. I can- 
not express the disorder that was at this meeting, for there was 
little reasoning on the matter; most of the discourses being in- 
vectives and unmannerly reflections against Gadderer, who being 
on the other hand as obstinate as a mule, nothing to purpose 
would have attended this conference, had not the noblemen 
above mention'd interposed and by their solid reason and autho- 
rity adjusted matters in the manner I have breifly related.. 

Wee were now in hopes that matters were so settled, the Bi- 
shops would have lived like bretheren not only of one Church 
but of affliction ; but wee soon saw tis one thing to smother a 
flame, and another to extinguish a fire. Some time after this 
transaction happened, the College proceeded to consecrate Mr. 
Duncan and Mr. Norrie, and they appointed the former to 
have the inspection of the diocess of Glasgow, and spoke of 
committing the care of the shyres of Angus and Mearns to. 
the other. As this was expected to be the consequence of his 
promotion, some, who had no good will to him, engaged Bishop 
Fullerton to promise not to consent therto, unless he was ap*- 
proven of by a majority of the prysbyters of those bounds and 
was found to be agreeable to the people, particularly those of in- 
terest and power ; and therfor when these appointments were 
first intended, he proposed that previous therto they should ap- 






REGISTER OF LETTERS. 125 

prise the prysbyters therof, and know their sentiments therin. 
This being agreed to, letters were accordingly writ by Fullerton 
in name of the College. Duncan being unanimously accepted, 
he was immediatly settled, but as the snare was laid for Nor- 
rie, preparations were made to oppose him. Tho Mr. Gad- 
derer had compounded matters for himself, yet Mr. Rattray of 
Craighall, and some few gentlemen his neighbours whom he had 
intoxicated with his notions about the usages, did by no means 
desire Mr. Norrie, because they knew he would not give way to 
their endevours to propogate the same, and their hearts were 
sett upon liaving Rattray to be consecrated and appointed their 
Bishop, designing to apply to the King for his consent therto, 
In order therfor to stave off Norrie, they prevaild witli a small 
majority of one or two of the prysbyters to signify their dissatis- 
faction with Mr. Norrie, and they carried about an address in 
the same strain, to which they procured a good many consider- 
able heretors hands, most of whom were perfectly indifferent iu 
the matter, and only complyd on the importunity of their friends 
and neighbours and without duely reflecting on the consequences 
therof. At the same time a considerable number of the clergy 
signifyd their entire satisfaction with Norrie, and the Lords 
Strathmore and Gray wrot to the same purpose to the College, 
assuring them he was most agreeable to a great and considera- 
ble body of that country, and that the opposition he mett with 
was from secret views no ways suitable to the interest of the 
Church. When the College mett in the begining of winter 1724 
to determine this affair, Mr. Rattray appear'd as representing 
the Clergy, and my Lord Panmure in name of the Heretors Re- 
monstrators, (which name they assumed) and I was sent for to 
be present at the debate. Panmure (who appeared in it either 
out of some private picque against Mr. Norrie, or to render him- 
self popular with these remonstrators) presented the address from 
tlie Heretors, and Mr. Rattray the remonstrance by the Clergy.. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

In opposition to which, the letters from the two noble Lords, and 
the approbation of the Clergy were produced and all read. And 
here I must observe, that tho the latter were full of the praises of 
Mr. Norrie, the other did not mention or insist on any one ac- 
cusation against him, except that he was holt in his temper. The 
College proceeded immediatly to canvass the claims of the se- 
veral prysbyters, how far they were severally entitled to give 
their consents. As I saw whither this was driving, I told them 
I was very ignorant in the affairs of the Church, and, for my in- 
struction, I beg'd to know in whom they thought the power of 
electing a Bishop was lodged, and that I beleived this was a mat- 
ter necessary to be adjusted befor they proceeded to such a scru- 
tiny. Panrnure, with some warmth, replyd, that by the legall 
establishment of the Church of Scotland, the right belong'd to 
the Dean and Chapter, but as that could not in the present situ- 
ation of affairs be obtain'd, the next best method to be followed 
was that of the primative Church, when no Bishop could be ap- 
pointed to any diocess without the concurrence of the majority 
of the Clergy and approbation of the people ; and in this he was 
seconded by Fullerton, Gaddercr and Rattray. I answer'd that I 
highly approved of the method, in so far as a due regard should 
be had to the inclinations and sentiments of both clergy and peo- 
ple ; but I did not find that this method of electing a Bishop to 
a particular diocess was either an esserjtiall point or an integral, 
that I reverenced those ancient fathers of the Church, but I did 
not think they were infallible and that future ages were blindly 
to follow their examples ; that circumstances render'd a method 
proper at one time very improper at another; and since it was 
evident in these our days, from a review of what dayly occurr'd 
in the popular calls of Prysbyterian ministers and the occasion of 
the present meeting, that lodging such a power in the inferiour 
clergy and the people, occasion'd divisions and animosities, I 
thought it ought to be avoided, especially seeing it was not agree- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 127 

able to the legall constitution of the Church of Scotland, which 
did not leave the election to the Dean and Chapter, for the King- 
was authorized by law to make the nomination, which he did by 
a conge de lire sent to the Chapter, who again were obliged to 
elect the very person the King named ; so that the power of ap- 
pointing Bishops to particular diocesses was properly in the 
King, and I thought it would be necessary for him to assume 
that power, since it was plain to what a bad use some were like 
to turn the liberty he left them ; but that in the present case, 
which, after the noise that had been made about it, could not in 
justice to Mr, Norries character and with the credit of the Col- 
lege be delayd, I offered it as my opinion that the College should 
cheifly consider the objections and not the numbers of the objec- 
tors to Mr. Norrie, and if they appear'd frivolous and humourous, 
or if they suspected there was more design'd than pretended, they 
should immediatly setle Mr. Norrie, and in this I was backd by 
all the other Bishops. Panmure presst a delay, in hopes matters 
would be accornodated ; I replyd that no delay was to be admit- 
ted, the Prysbyters pretended to encroach on the power, \vhich,, 
in the present case, none could claim by any legal tittle but the 
College ; that the heats and divisions were already gone to a 
great lenth and would encrease by a delay, and that there was 
no way to settle peace and order in these countrys, but for the 
College to assert and maintain their authority. Panmure and I 
after this came away, and after several meetings and much 
wrangling, the Bishops did cast several of the prysbyters that 
were against Norrie, as having no good tittle, and so the majo- 
rity turn'd on his side, and he was appointed to inspect and ex- 
ercise the episcopal jurisdiction in these shyres, by the consent 
of all the Bishops, except Fullerton and Qedderer, who, finding 
they were outvoted, claim'd a negative power vested in Fuller- 
ton as primus; but being obliged to give up that point, Fullertou 
was prevail'd with to refuse signing the minuts, 'tho he was urged 



1 28 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

and presst to doe it as incumbent on him, being preses of the 
meeting. He obstinatly refused, imagining that if it was known 
that he had not consented, his character was so universally ap- 
prov'd of, that it would lessen that of Norrie and even give 
grounds to those that would not submitt to him, to urge the in- 
validity of his tittle, in regard that he wanted the metropolitan 
authority belonging to the primus, which was necessary in this 
case. However the other Bishops caused the clerk of the meeting 
sign the minutes of their proceedings, and give an extract therof 
to Mr. Norrie, as being sufficient to warrant and authorize him 
to act in the terms therof. This conduct of Fullerton lessend his 
character very much, and Rattray exposed himself exceedingly, 
having been so willfull as to enter, in name of the prysbyters, a 
protestation against Mr. Norrie, and so rash or vain as to print 
and disperse it thro this and other kingdoms, to the great satisfac- 
tion of the Prysbyterians who laughed and rejoyced at these di- 
visions. As soon as the College adjourned, Mr. Norrie went 
home and was kindly received by his friends and adherents, but 
his opposers continued in their bad humour and would not submitt 
to him nor own him as their Bishop, and the malice of the two 
partys encreased dayly, and came at lenth to a great hight. 
And as the King's trustees perceived that discord and division 
amongst his friends would be the consequence of leaving his 
subjects, especially the clergy, to act with such full powers, di- 
rected me to write the following letter to him. 

" December 8th 1724. 

" Sir, Since my writing a letter a few weeks agoe, and which 
I beleive will come at the same time with this to your hands, I 
received directions from your trustees to acquaint you, that the 
College of Bishops, in virtue of the power you gave them, did 
immediatly proceed to consecrate Norrie and Duncan, Bishops 
at large, and some little time therafter, they appointed the last 
to inspect and have the charge of the diocess of Glasgow, aud 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 129 

proposed to committ the like in the shires of Angus and Mearns 
to the other. But in this last they divided and run into the ut- 
most hight of party rage, in which they were severally supported 
by the noblemen and gentlemen of these bounds. However the 
majority of the Bishops, seconded by the Earl of Strathmore and 
several other persons of notte that are for Norrie, settled him 
there in opposition to Fullerton and Gedderer who have opposed 
it and protested against it and are seconded by a great number 
of gentlemen. In short not only are the Bishops broke in peices 
amongst themselves, but the divisions and heats amongst the 
laity is also very great, and has occasion'd such a breach and 
misunderstanding as will not, I fear, be easily or soon accomo- 
dated, to the prejudice of the common interest in these loyall 
shyres. 

" Your trustees, in order to prevent the like disputes for the 
-future, humbly offer as their advice that you'd be pleased to write 
to the Bishop of Edinburgh, signifying that tho you had allowed 
them to consecrate a certain number of Bishops that the order 
may be continued, yet you desired the College should not for the 
future proceed to settle any to the charge and inspection of any 
particular diocess or province^ untill they have acquainted your 
trustees of the person's name ; that they may enquire how far 
he'l be acceptable to your faithfull subjects, and may be in other 
respects fitt for that part of the country, and after making a re- 
port therof to you, you signify your pleasure therin. Your trus- 
tees conceive this method will prevent such divisions and discord 
as have arisen on this late occasion, and will at the same time 
support and maintain the power lodged in and practised by the 
Crown in the nomination and appointment of Bishops, and with- 
all be mighty agreeable to the subjects, when they see your care 
and concern for them. This I am directed to lay befor you, as 
what your trustees think for your own, as well as the Church and 

VOL. n. s 



130 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

the country's service. I wrote so fully in my last that I have 
nothing more to add but that I am your " 

Whilst the affair I have narrated was in agitation, I received 
the following letter * from the King. 

" August 31, 1724. 

" Since what I wrote to you of the 18th March, I have not 
heard from you, which I expect with impatience to doe, and in 
the mean time shall delay no longer informing you of some 
particulars which it is fitt on many accounts you and some of 
my principal Scots friends should be informed of. The present 
situation of Europe, as it appears to the publick, is sufficiently 
known to you. It is scarce possible that it should continue long 
as it is, and I cannot easiely imagine a change which may not be 
more or less favourable to the good cause. My constant en- 
devours and application to forreign princes in behalf of it, nei- 
ther is nor shall be discontinued, and I cannot but say that for- 
reign affairs never appeard to me with so favourable an aspect 
as at present. I doe not indeed see any immediate hopes of suc- 
cess in my negotiations with forreign Courts, but the present sy- 
stem of politicks is such, that they may alter when wee least ex- 
pect it, and therfor my faithfull Scots subjects should always 
have it in their view to be in a readiness of acting in a proper 
manner, whenever a favourable occasion offers. In the interim 
I shall be glad to hear from them as often as prudence will allow, 
and the more directly they are addrest to my self, the better. 
They see by experience how cautious I am in all that relates to 
their safty, and will I'm sure be glad to know how entirely I can 
depend on the prudence and fidelity of John Hay, of whose good 
qualitys I have had a long experience ; and as I have entrusted 
him with my most secret affairs for many years past, and ao 

* Received 18 November 1724. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 13 1 

tually now employ him as secretary, so I shall soon give him 
the name of it, to enable him the better to serve me and the 

C3.USC* 

" I have been always unwilling to mention Marr, but I find my 
self indispensably engaged at present to let my Scots friends 
know that I have withdrawn my confidence entirely from him, 
as I shall be obliged to doe from all who may be any ways in- 
fluenced by him. This conduct is founded on the strongest and 
most urgeing necessity, in which my regard to my faithmll sub- 
jects and servants have the greatest share. What is here said of 
Marr, is not with a view of its being made publick, there being 
no occasion for that, since many years agoe he putt himself un- 
der such engagements that he could not serve me in a publick 
manner, neither has he been publickly employ'd by me. 

" After this what I most earnestly recommend to my friends, is 
to arm themselves against the artifices and contrivances of our 
enemies, who are by all manner of means endevouring to sow 
divisions and discord amongst them, as the only means they have 
left to support themselves by ; but all their endevours will be in 
vain, if they find they are dispised and that nothing can shake 
my Scots friends in their union amongst themselves and their 
submission and attachment to me. I have had too many proofs 
of it ever to doubt of their continuing in those their fixt princi- 
ples, and I can say with truth I deserve this conduct from them 
on all accounts, since the tender affection I bear to them was 
born with me, and will ever induce me to doe all in my power 
for their happiness and wellfare. I am unwilling to trouble my 
friends with particular letters which might at this time expose 
them to danger, and which I am sure they doe not need, to be 
convinced of rny kindness for them, of which you will assure 
them, and I have nothing furder to add at present, but let you 
know the continuance of the good health of my family. My 
confidence in your end&vours to serve me and the cause is great, 



132 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

and my sincere esteem and friendship for you will ever be the 
same." 

A letter to the King in answer to his last, wherin I acquainted 
him at lenth of a long; conversation I had with the Duke of 
Wharton, which is needless to insert in this coppy, so I only sett 

down what it furder contained. 

" November 28th 1724. 

Sir, You have long ere this I hope gott mine of the 18th of 
August, being in answer to yours of the 18th of March. The 
contents of yours which I had the honour lately to receive shall 
as you directed be communicated only to such for whom you de- 
sign'd it, and that with all imaginable caution. 

" It is some time agoe since your friends here had doubts of 
the Duke of Marr, and thence it was that I was directed to men- 
tion him in the manner I did in my last two letters, it being a 
matter of no small moment to us, to know in whom wee might 
confide thorowly, and of whom beware, especially when a person 
of his figure was the object. 

" As your friends here have the utmost deference for your 
judgement, Mr. Hay no doubt will be very acceptable in the 
station you have thought him fitt to serve in. I wish his lady a 
happy deliverance (for I am told they design to carry the law to 
the utmost rigour against her) and that his brother Kinnoul had 
not, by deserting his old friends and accepting of a scrub pen- 
sion, given himself up to the direction of the present powers, 
contrary to what one might reasonably have expected from a 
gentleman of his birth, estate, sense and by past professions and 
actions. I am told that they have some apprehensions that Lord 
Bathurst is on the same way, at least that he is prevaild with to 
retire and lye by. 

" The account you are pleased to give of your affairs abroad 
must needs be joyfully received by all who wish you well, and 
are sensible of their countrys unhappy state, which I think can- 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 133 

not long subsist under its present hardships. Tho the effects of 
these your forreign negotiations may be remote, yet any thing 
that appears like the dawning of more happy days, gives great 
pleasure, and supports our spirits. Were but forreign princes 
once sensible that your restoration will sute with their own par- 
ticular interests, I think it very easie to convince them to a de- 
monstration that it is practicable without much charge or hazard, 
for no very great power would be sufficient to give such life to 
your affairs in this island as would soon terminate in the over- 
throw of your enemies. 

tf Wee were terribly alarm'd with some late accounts of the 
Queens indisposition, but our fears are now removed. That God 
may preserve yovir sacred persons and with success crown all 
your endevours to redress all your own injuries and releive your 
oppressd people, is the earnest desire of Your &c. 
' "P. S. Since writing this letter and a review of your last, a 
difficulty hath occurr'd to me, which I presume to lay befor you, 
because you alone can solve it. You are pleased to intimate that 
your confidence is withdrawn from Marr, and all who may be 
influenced by him : there are in the number of your trustees 
here, two persons, who, tho I beleive them very honest gentlemen, 
tis presumeable may be under his influence, at least they have a 
great attachment to him, and these are Lord Dun and Sir John 
Erskine. Now I want to know your pleasure whither or not wee 
should continue to act in concert with them in your affairs. I 
have mention'd nothing of your last to them, and till I have your 
directions, I can manage matters well enough so as to keep fair 
with them, for as there are but three or four of us that meet to- 
gither (of which number these two are not) and that I goe be- 
twixt them and the other trustees, I can easiely prevent giving 
these two persons any just grounds of exception, and at the same 
time keep them in the dark, untill I have your directions. 

" By a letter last post from the Duke of Wharton I am told 



134 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

that Kinnoul seems to act the part of a true convert, by being- 
very zealous, for he had not only delivered to the Secretary of 
State the letters he received lately from abroad, particularly those 
from Mrs. Hay, but had likwyse discoverd that Mr. Weems the 
apothecary used to receive and convey his correspondence with 
his friends on the other side of the water." 

About the latter end of the year 1724 a resolution past the 
House of Commons wherby instead of the malt tax, six pence 
per barrell of ale was laid of additional duty on Scotland (and 
not extended to England) and the praemiums on grain exported 
from thence was taken off. As this was a plain breach of the 
Union, in so far as it is expressly stipulated that there shall be an 
equallity of taxes and praemiums on trade, every Scots man was 
highly enraged at it, for as it was evident that the want of the 
prsemiums would effectually stop the exportation of grain, which 
would therby become a meer clrugg, no body could foresee to 
what hight this precedent of taxing Scotland separatly from En- 
gland might afterwards be extended. Tis impossible to express 
the resentment of the nation at this measure, all partys seem'd 
reconciled and to unite in opposing what was so pernicious to 
the country in general and at the same time touched every par- 
ticular mans coppyhold. The King's friends laid hold upon this 
occasion, and privatly, underhand, fomented the bad humour, it 
not being fitt, as indeed there was no need of their distinguishing 
their zeal at this time. A meeting of the heretors of the shyre of 
Edinburgh was called, where I presented an address to the House 
of Commons, which being heartiely approved of, was signd and 
next day sent up by an express to London. There were also at this 
and a subsequent meeting two letters, the first drawn by my self, 
and the other by Sir John Dalrymple, to our representative in 
Parliament, containing directions and instructions how he was 
to behave in this matter ; and because these were the standard 
by which the convention of Royall burrows and most of the bur- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 135 

rows and shyres fram'd the addresses and instructions which 
from thence were likwyse sent up, I shall here insert a coppy of 
the address and first letter of instructions from the shyre of Edin- 
burgh. I could not procure a coppy of the second letter, and 
the want therof is of no great moment, seeing the main scope 
and purport of it was rigorously to enforce the first, with this 
addition, That in case the applications made against these reso- 
lutions had not their due weight, that then he their represen- 
tative should protest against the measure as a violation of the 
Union, and therupon leave the House. Tho it is certain and was 
told that by the forms of the House of Commons no protestation 
could be enterd or would be admitted, yet people in this and 
most other shyres and burrows were fond of the expression and 
insisted on that direction, to shew therby more strongly what 
were their sentiments and inclinations. 

" To the Honourable the Commons of Great Britain in Par- 
liament assembled. 

" The Petition of the Barrens and Freeholders in the Shy re of 

* 

Edinburgh 

" Humbly sheweth, 

" That being inform'd of a motion made and agreed to in tlie 
House of Commons for imposeing an additionall duty of six pence 
per barrell of all ale vended and sold in Scotland, and for taking 
away the bountys allow'd by law for exportation of the grain 
that is of the grouth and produce of Scotland as an equivalent 
for Scotlands being exempted from paying the same dutys on 
malt, that are to be imposed on England Wee beg leave to 
remonstrate against the same, not that wee apprehend this ex- 
pedient will be of it self a greater burden than the malt tax, but 
because it would be expressly contrary to the Articles of the 
Union, and would prove a dangerous precedent for introduceing 
further innovations, and would invalidate the security of the 



136 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

present Constitution which is established and depends upon the 
Contract of Union betwixt the two kingdoms. By the seventh 
article of the said Union it is agreed that all parts of the united 
kingdom be for ever, from and after the Union, lyable to the same 
excise upon exciseable liquors, excepting only that ale in Scotland, 
sold and retaild for two pence the Scots pint, be not after the Union 
lyable, on account of the present excise upon exciseable liquors in 
England, to any higher imposition than two shillings sterling upon 
twelve gallons of Scots measure, so that if any further excise is im- 
posed upon Scotland, without being at the same time extended to 
England, the equality stipulated by the forsaid article would be in- 
fringed. By the sixt article of the Union, it is stipulated and agreed 
that all parts of the united kingdoms for ever from and after the 
Union shall have the same allowance encouragements and draw- 
backs, and be under the sa-me prohibitions restrictions and regula- 
tions of trade, and lyable to the same dutys and customs on export 
and import; from which it appears the grain of the grouth and pro- 
duce of Scotland is equally cntituled to praemiums on exportation 
with that of the grouth and produce of England ; and debarring 
the Scots grain so exported from being cntituled to premiums 
allowed and continued to the grain of England, wee conceive 
would be a plain and manifest violation of the said article. As 
the said two articles stand evidently in opposition to the forsaid 
motion, wee beg leave to represent that they seem to us to be 
fundamental, and not subject to any alteration whatsoever, so 
long as the Union of the two kingdoms does subsist ; for it is 
evident that they were intended, as it is expressly declared, that 
they should remain for ever, and consequently, wee humbly con- 
ceive, are not subject even to the legislature, whose power and 
authority being founded upon the Union of the two kingdoms, 
must, by the law of nations and the very nature of the Union, 
be regulated and determined by the contract of agreement be- 
tween the formerly independent but now united nations, an in- 



IVEGTSTER OF LETTERS. 137 

fringement of any part wherof would be a violation of the faith 
on which the Union was founded and without which it cannot 
subsist. Wee therfor earnestly pray Your Honours will reject 
the foresaid proposalls of an additional excise upon the ale in 
Scotland and for debarring the grain and produce of Scotland 
from having the same bountys on export as is allowed to the grain 
in England; as being contrary to the Articles. of UnioiL, upon 
the faith wherof the two kingdoms were and remain unitted, 
which wee hope and are persuaded that you the protectors of the 
libertys of Great Britain will ever inviolably maintain." 

Follows a letter from the Heretors of the shyre of Edinburgh 
to Robert Dundass of Arniston, Lord Advocate, their Represen- 
tative in Parliament. 

* Edinburgh, December 17tli 1724. 

" My Lord, The accotmts wee have lately had of a motion 
made and approved of in the Committee of ways and means for 
an additionall excise upon ale vended in Scotland, and depriving 
us of the benefitt of the bountys continued to England on the 
exportation of their grain, hath allarm'd us exceedingly; not 
only as it discourages our industry at home, increases the burdens 
which wee were formerly scarce able to bear, and tends to de- 
stroy our trade, but likewyse and cheifly as it is a plain and ma- 
nifest violation of the articles of the Union, seeing if such a pre- 
cedent be laid down for altering or rather subverting these ar- 
ticles that are expressly stipulated to remain for ever, the same 
may be extended to every other branch and all the priviledges 
and advantages that are stipulated for the benefit and security 
of the two nations, with respect either to their civill or religious 
interests. 

" The foundation of a Government is so tender a point, as not 
to admitt of any infringement, even in the most minute parti- 
cular, without endangering the whole fabrick, and wee have 
the greater reason to be alarm'd at such a design, because wee 

VOL. II. T 



138 REGISTER OF LETTER?. 

are united with a nation much more powerful! than ours, and 
that wee have not an equall number of voices in the two houses 
of Parliament, to support and maintain our rights, nor is there 
any umpire to whom wee can apply, and who is entituled to in- 
terpose and enforce the due observation of the articles and con- 
ditions, on which the Union of the two kingdoms is founded. As 
these dismall effects seem to us the naturall consequences of the 
forsaid motion, wee doe not doubt but Your Lordship will exert 
your self in opposeing it. Wee were in hopes that the same rea- 
sons which moved our neighbours in England to connive at the 
duty on malt not being exacted in Scotland for the time bypast, 
would have still prevaild with them to ease us of that heavy bur- 
den ; but seeing the publick service doeth require a further de- 
mand of supplys upon this part of the kingdom) wee would much 
rather have the dutys upon malt imposed and exacted at the 
same rate and in the same manner as in England, than have a 
precedent laid down for unhingeing of the Union, which is a ne- 
cessary consequence of that motion. 

" My Lord wee arc extreamly pleased to hear of the opposition 
Your Lordship made to the bill; there never was an occasion 
more pressing than the present to exert your parts in defence of 
your country; wee doubt not but you will be vigorously seconded 
by all our countrymen in Parliament, and wee hope you will all 
joyn and concurr in sliewing your utmost resentment against the 
instruments and prornotters of a design attended with such fatal 
consequences, and wee cannot imagine there is any person or 
body of men so powerfull as to despise the effects therof, when 
they are sensible it proceeds from a conviction of the injury in- 
tended to the country, and a fixed resolution of uniting, togither 
to maintain her just rights. Wee have heard what good effects 
such a hearty coalition of the Scots members did produce on a 
former occasion, when the malt tax was first extended to Scot- 
land, towards induceing the then ..powerfull enough Ministry to 

T .11 -JOY 



'REGISTER OF LETTERS. 139 

supcrcecd the execution therof ; and as wee are persuaded the pre- 
sent representatives of Scotland are as sincere and resolute in 
their country's cause, wee may expect the same good effects will 
follow the like just resentment and vigorous resolutions following 
upon it; but in case wee be disappointed therin, as wee cannot 
but reckon such proceeding a plain dounright violation of the 
articles of Union, wee doe require and expect that you will in the 
most solemn manner signify these our sentiments to the House 
of Commons, after which wee are of opinion there is no furder 
use for any representation of the Scots in Parliament. 

" Wee have transmitted to Your Lordship a petition to be pre- 
sented if you see proper, and wee are informed that the like will 
be sent from most if not all the shyres and towns of Scotland, by 
which it will appear how uniform their sentiments are with re- 
spect to the subject against which they remonstrate, Befor wee 
conclude, wee must acquaint Your Lordship, never was there any 
thing that seem'd so much to affect the minds of people of all 
ranks and degrees in this country, and how far the same may 
be carried is very hard to tell, but in all appearance it will occa- 
sion a great discontent that will not easiely be removed and may 
be attended with bad consequences. This by direction and in 
name of the gentlemen who signd the petition, is signifyd to Your 
Lordship by my Lord Your &c." 

These warm addresses and instructions did not a little startle 
the Scots members of Parliament, and even the Ministry; and 
there were likewyse many private letters written to them by their 
friends, assuring them of the highest resentment if they did not 
perform what was desired and expected of them. Had these 
members been endued with a publick spirit and resolution, such 
applications would have been needless; but as they consisted of 
a parcell of people of low fortunes that could not subsist without 
their board-wages (which at ten guineas a week during each 
session was duely paid them) or meer tools and dependents, it was 

T 2 



140 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

not to be expected they would act the part which became them 
for their countrys service, and therfor these representations were 
judged necessary to spurr them up to their duty and withall show 
the Ministry that the people would not behave so tamely as did 
their mean spirited mercenary representatives, who, perceiving 
they would loss all their interest and scarce dare venture to re 
turn home if they did not follow the instructions given them, 
made most humble applications to the Ministry, who on the other 
hand being apprehensive the resentment might be carried to 
some hight, and unwilling, as matters stood in Europe, to em- 
broil themselves at home, thought it expedient to drop the reso- 
lutions above mention'd, (which they at first preferr'd, because 
they judged it would be no easie matter to levy the malt tax in 
Scotland) and agreed with the Scots members to impose three 1 - 
pence per busshell on malt, being but the half of what was ley'd 
in England ; and a bill was accordingly passt as fast as the forms 
could possibly allow of, least their constituents should have time 
to remonstrate against it. 

In this affair, the old stanch English Whiggs (that is the Com- 
mon Wealth party) and also the Torrys appeard violently against 
the Scots; the first, because they beleived that country so much 
wedded to the King's interest, the others out of revenge, because 
the Scots members supported the Ministry in all even their gross- 
est measures, and particularly as they had threaten'd them at 
the time because of their scandalous behaviour in the swearing- 
act. These partys thus uniting compelld the Ministry to come 
in to the measure, who were likewyse of themselves very desire- 
ous to have the malt tax or something in lieu therof out of Scot- 
land, because the revenues arriseing from that country did no 
more than pay the civil list, and maintain a suitable number of 
troops; and the charges of subsisting the Scots members of Par- 
liament became a burden upon the Government, and they wanted 
either to have an equivalent or be eased therof. So that Wai- 



REGISTER OP LETTERS, 141 

pole plainly and frankly told these gentlemen when they applyd 
to him, that they knew what money was raised and how applyd 
in Scotland, and they must lay their account with taying up their 
stokins with their own garters. Thus for supporting a parcell 
of corrupt locusts, the country must be oppressed, which at the 
same time indeed deserved no less for electing such a sett of whom 
no better could be expected. 

Whilst this affair was in agitation the Kings friends were not 
idle; they brought about that delegates from most shires were 
chosen and appointed to meet and correspond togither for con- 
sulting and giving information of what occurr'd, that so mea- 
sures might be taken speedily and prosecuted uniformly as occa- 
sions offer'd. And as it was plain that all these grudges and dis- 
contents made for the King, some methods were thought of to 
be followed out, in case the Ministry had insisted on their first 
scheme, particularly that such shy re and burrow shoud recall 
the right and power they had given their several representatives 
to sitt in the British Parliament, and appoint new ones to meet 
and determine what course was to be taken for settling the na- 
tion, now that the articles of the Union were so openly violated 
and consequently dissolved. The effects of which step were very 
obvious to make for the King, and I have good reasons to think, 
from the tempers and inclinations of the people at that juncture, 
this measure might have been pursued, had not the Ministry 
changed theirs ; but 'tho the malt tax was a burden too heavy to 
bear, it was not however illegall, and so did not afford an handle 
to work on as the first scheme. Nevertheless it left the people 
in a bad enough temper towards the Government, which after- 
wards displayd it self more fully. 

Of this affair I gave the King a particular account in a letter 
dated the 2?th of March 1725, which it is needless here to in- 
sert, being much to the same purpose with what is above nar- 
rated. In this letter I took nottice that the Ministry still reckoned 



142 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

themselves in hazard whilst the Highlanders were in being, and 
that wee were told they design'd this very session to pass a law 
'making it death for any of that gang to have any sort of arms, 
or wear the Highland dress, having at the same time schemes for 
suppressing the language, with intention of dissipating that body 
of people, and that it was beleived, that with some such view 
as this, General Wade was sent doun on pretence of reviewing 
tlie troops last summer, for he traversed all the Highlands, and 
it was observed he made remarks of all the passes and narrowly 
enquired after the characters of persons, of all which and the like 
he took notts. 

I likewyse acquainted the King that tliere were letters seut 
hither from France, in severall peoples hands, accuseing Mar of 
such base treacherous practices discovered by the Bishop of Ro- 
chester, that the like had scarce been heard of, and seem'd to be 
what no man endued with common sense or the least drop of no- 
ble blood could perpetrate; and tliat the King's ireinds were at 
a loss, in not knowing what credit to give to such reports, 'tho 
they apprehended the worst from the directions he had lately 
given of having no correspondence with Mar or his adherents, 
from whom he had withdrawn all confidence. 

Soon after the dispatch of this letter, I received the following 
letters from the King and Collonel Hay, and made the following 
returns. 

Letter from the King*. 

" October 27th 1721. 

"Yours of the 18th of August carne safe to me a few days 
agoe, and I was not a little pleased to find by it, the good effects 
which my letter and your and my other freinds zeal and vigilance 
have produced in ecclesiasticall affairs, which I hope will goe on 
for the time to come in a peaceable and becomeing manner, and 

~"---" - -~ - - - - . ' ' " i - - "" ' 

* Received 3 April 1725. 






REGISTER OP LETTERS. 143 

you will lett the Bishops know how sensible I am of the submis- 
sion and regard they have shewn to me on this occasion, and of 
my constant desire to favour and protect them, being- very sen- 
sible how much they are attached to my person and interest. 

" I have not heard in relation to Mr. Rattray of CraighalL, but 
what you say of him, if ever I doe, I shall make the proper use 
of the light you give me, and the Bishops may be very well as- 
sured of my having allwyse all possible regard for their advice 
and opinion in such matters. You will find inclosed a letter 
for them, not to be delivered unto them, but in the event of Bi- 
shop Fullerton's death, 'tho in the mean time you will communi- 
cate it to such of my freinds as advised the writing of it. 

" I also now write to Stralton in relation to Corsar, but in such 
a manner, as that the first cannot be in the least shockd at it, and 
that the last, by being in the entire confidence of Straiten will 
allwyse be able to supply his place, either in case of sickness or 
death. You will see by all this the particular regard I have for 
your advice, and that of those whom you have confidence with 
on these matters, and whose names I should be glad to know. 

" What I wrote to you about two months agoe leaves me no- 
thing particular here to say on other matters. Forreign affairs 
are much in the same posture, and I cannot but be still of opinion 
that wee never had more reason than now to hope well from them 
and for some favourable change at last in my favours. The 
best and most certain news I can send you at present is that of 
the Queen's being about three months gone with child, which I 
am sure will be a very acceptable account to you and my other 
freinds whom you converse with. You know how acceptable 
your letters and advice will allwyse be, and so I hope you will 
not deprive me of them, when you have any thing particular to 
impart to me, whom you will ever find full of the sincerest value 
and freindship for you. 

" P. S. When you see Duke Hamilton, you will let him know 



144 imiisTEn OF MATTERS. 

the share I take in his late loss, and how much I count on his at- 
tachement to me." 

Follows the foresaid letter from the King to the Bishops. 

" October 27th 1724. 

" The many instances I have had of your loyalty zeal and sub- 
mission to me, cannot but make me with reason solicitous to 
provyde as much as in me lyes for your.wellfare and advantage; 
and wheras Bishop Fullerton's great age and tender constitution 
makes it but too probable that he cannot live long, and wheras 
in the event of his death, both your Body and my service may 
suffer much if there be not some person ready to preside amongst 
you in the same manner that that worthy Bishop has and does 
still doe, I have found it necessary by this letter, which will be 
delivered unto you upon the event of his death, to desire and di- 
rect that Bishop Irvjn, whom I think in all respects fit for such a 
charge, should, in the event above mentioned, reside at Edin- 
burgh and preside amongst you as Fullerton does, for the in- 
terim till I may be able to send furder directions to you in that 
respect. I hope it will be long befor this letter be delivered to 
you; and when it is, I doubt not of your receiving it with be- 
comeing submission towards me, and as a mark of the particu- 
lar regard I have for your Body and the wellfare of the Church 
of Scotland." 

A letter from Collonel Hay*. 

" February 10th 1725. 

" The King being under some concern least the letter which he 
wrote to you dated the 31st of August may not have come safe, 
has order'd me to send you here a coppy of it. He has heard no- 
thing from you since a letter he received in October and answer'd 
the same month, but does not doubt you are still continuing to 
doe every thing in your power for advanceing of his interest. 

* Received 3 April 1725. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

The King employs all his diligence and art to forward matters iu 
these parts, and I am hopeful 1 he shall soon succeed in obtaining 
what may be necessary for putting his subjects in the way of 
serving him and themselves. Forreign princes are rather more 
divided amongst themselves than ever; the so much talk'd of re- 
conciliation betwixt the Czar and Hanover is not yet concluded, 
and if it ever is, it will in all appearance create differences of 
greater consequence to the King's interest, than the Czar's mis- 
understanding with Hanover has produced for these several years 
past. There are many events, which according to the course of 
nature must soon happen, any one of which must give a fair op- 
portunity to the King to act to some purpose. He is doing every 
thing in his power to prepare himself to profitt of a favourable 
conjunction, and does not doubt but his freinds at home will be 
ready to joyn with him when he shall call for their assistance, 
which, when it does happen, will in all appearance be a surprize 
upon them. The present posture of affairs makes it easie for one 
to foretell this without being a conjurer. I hope this shall find 
you in perfect good health, I cannot wish it more so than this 
iamily enjoys; we expect soon to see it increased, which will be 
wellcome news to you and all freinds." 

A letter to the King. 

" April 8th 1725. 

" Last week I received at the same time one from you bearing 
date the 27th of October last, and one from Mr. Hay dated Fe- 
bruary 10th. Having no method of addressing to him, and 
withall your orders to correspond directly with your self, I shall 
mention in this what I have to say to both these letters. By this 
time I hope you have got a former letter of mine, which had it 
come sooner would have prevented your ordering a coppy of yours 
of the 31st of August being sent to me, seeing I therin told you 
I had communicated the contents of that letter with the caution 
and in the manner you directed. I gave you not long agoe an 

VOL. IL. u 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

account of unparallel'd crimes and weakness's laid to Mar's 
charge by various and sundry letters from France, Faigland and 
Holland. I was within these few days inform'd, that Lord Dun 
had received a letter lately from him, wherin he positively denys 
one and all the articles laid to his charge, affirming they are all 
the produce of the Bishop of Rochester's malice, and that his in- 
nocence in due time will fully appear, as will ever his fidelity to 
you. He says the Bishop has sent over Major Walkenshaw to 
Scotland, and given him two hundred pound to defray his ex- 
pences, and that his bussiness is to asperse his character and gain 
credit with the King's freinds to the malitious lyes the Bishop 
has invented, but he hopes he will not be regarded. I did not 
see this letter, but Lord Eglington brought me an account of it 
from Dun; neither have I as yet seen the Major nor any that has 
conversed with him, so that I cannot tell whither or not he acts 
the part Mar affirms was his design of coming here. Whatever 
may be in Mar's conduct, I wish your friends abroad had writt 
less on that subject, for the blazing of such reports true or false 
is by no means a service to your interest. 

" I am now to beg your pardon that I omitted to sett doun the 
names of those, in concert with whom I mention'd what you 
have thought fitt to doe with respect to Bishop Irvin: The truth 
on't is, as it is a subject necessary to be keept very secret, least 
the divulgeing it should occasion that flame suddenly which it 
was design 'd to prevent afterwards, I did not mention it to any 
but Wigton and Kincardine by whose advice I wrote of it to you, 
and to whom only I will communicate your letter, till the event 
happen for useing it, and then others may be acquainted therof, 
and the measure executed or not as they see proper and most for 
your service. I mentioned in a former letter the division that 
hath arisen in Angus and other neighbouring shires with respect 
to Bishop Norrie ; his opposers have not the confidence to lay 
any thing to his charge, yet they obstinately refuse to subrnitt to 

, . li 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 147 

him, and to such a hight is the enmity come, that I am very much 
affraid some mischeif will happen, for when any of the two parr 
ties meet they seldom fail to quarrell, and on all occasions ma- 
nifest the utmost malice to one another. But as the Lords Strath- 
more and Gray, and Fothringhame of Pourie have a fixed inter- 
est in that country, and are justifyd and supported by all impar- 
tial men of sense in the kingdom, I hope in time matters may be 
settled, and peace and unity be reestablished, 'tho I cannot but in 
the interim regrate that I see these mutineers supported and en- 
couraged by some who think therby to ingratiate themselves with 
them, with a view, I imagine, of being popular and leaders of 
that party, and to lessen the interest of the Lords above mentioned ; 
and its remarkable that the ring-leaders in this fray are some of 
the very persons whose factious humours appeared so conspicuous 
at Perth. And indeed what thus dayly happens, shews the rea- 
sonableness or rather the necessity of the Bishops being settled 
in their several districts, and most other matters being determined 
by your direction and authority; seeing some and not a few 
there are who will not submitt to any subordinate power in many 
cases. Of this, by the direction of allmost all your trustees, I 
wrote to you some time agoe, and they with the Bishops long for 
your return therto, being what is so necessary for the peace of 
UKJ country and the interest of the common cause, which ever 
did and will suffer by such unseasonable divisions. 

" I have little or nothing to add of this country to what was 
contain'd in a letter I did my self the honour to write to you not 
long agoe. I must sincerely congratulate you upon the prospect 
of the encrease of your family. As this news is joyfull to some, 
it is a visible mortification to others. I have some thoughts in a 
little time of going to London about some private affairs, and I 
shall be instructed by your trustees here to see if it is possible to 
settle a correspondence with your freinds there, that on fitt ocea* 

2u 



148 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

sions they may understand one another and act joyntly for your 
service." 

A letter from Collonel Hay*. 

" March 10th 1725. 

" Your letters to the King, of the 28th November and 8 De- 
cember are come safe only two or three days agoe, and it is a 
great satisfaction to find that the sending the coppy of that writt 
by the King to you the last of August was useless. My letter to 
you which accompynied it was dated 10 of February. Mr. 
Stevenson's going to Scotland gives the King a great deal of un- 
easiness, since he was the person that convey'd letters to you in 
Will Dundass's absence, 'tho tis hoped he was not acquainted 
with your address. But it may be convenient for the time to 
come that you send a new one. 

" This serves cheifly to acquaint you that about eleven a clock 
Tuesday the sixt of this month, the Queen was safely delivered 
of a son, who has been named Henry Duke of York. The mo- 
ther and child are as well as can be wisht, and great appearance 
of my being able to send you frequent news of this kind. You'l 
easiely beleive that upon this occasion it is not possible for the 
King to make particular answers to your letters, the necessary 
notifications &c. taking up his whole time, so I must referr you 
to another occasion, and shall only say as to forreign transactions 
that since my last matters have a much better appearance for the 
King's interest than they had then. 

" A match is treating betwixt the King of France and Hano- 
ver's grand-daughter, in prejudice of the Infanta of Spain now of 
France; and the Duke of Bourbon will meet with the greatest 
difficulty in finishing an affair of that kind, since Spain insists 
upon the espousals being made in the month of April, according 

* Received 17 May 1725. 



RECHSTER OF LETTERS. 149 

to" former agreements, and in all appearance a rupture 'twixt 
Spain and the King of France will follow upon it, and. in that 
case Cardinal Alberoni's return to Spain is likely. The encle- 
vours of the Court of France for making up the difference be- 
twixt the Czar and Hanover will in all appearance come to no- 
thing-, and I dont say this without good grounds: so that all putt 
togither the prospect is not bad, since it cannot be imagined the 
Duke of Bourbon, who is certainly personally a freind to the 
King, would ever oppose what ever another Prince might doe 
for his service. 

" The King approves of your cultivating a freindship with the 
Duke of Wharton, and I make you my compliments upon the 
freindship he shews to you and your son. 

" Last Munday the King was pleased to declare me his secre- 
tary and Earl of Inverness; I wish that step may prove for the 
advantage of his service; I protest I have no other view in ac- 
cepting of it ! since both the confidence and the honour can serve 
only to embarass me; however I shall endevour to keep a strict 
eye upon the rocks where others have split. After this you wont 
disapprove of my saying nothing of the Duke of Mar who has 
declared himself my mortall enemie, only because I spoke truth 
to him, and could not in my conscience enter into his measures 
nor approve his conduct, 'tho I always shun'd saying any thing- 
to his disadvantage but to the King alone, from whom 1 thought 
I was obliged to conceal nothing. An idle superficial appear- 
ance of love to his oun country, was to have laid the foundation 
to the utter ruin of the King's cause, and by this means he im- 
posed upon several people; but the bottom of all was self in- 
terest, and had he not ruin'd the cause entirely, at least his 
scheme was so ordered that he should always have it in his 
power to putt a stop to the King's restoration when he pleased, 
and had it happen'd in his time, it certainly must have been by 
a miracle. Here is more than I design'd or thought I should 



1 50 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

have been able to say to you by this post, and wishing you and 
other friends may be heartiely mirry togither upon the subject of 
ours here these days past, I desire you'l doe me the justice to be- 
leive me Yours &c. 

" P. S. The King makes you his compliments on this occa- 
sion, and to your partners. I never transmitted a letter by Mr. 
Weems, nor never wrote nor received a letter from the Earl of 
Kinnoul since the year 1715." 

A letter* from the King. 

" March 21 1725. 

" The letter which Lord Inverness wrote to you last week, 
will I'm sure have been not a little acceptable to you, and I 
thank God I can now add to it, that the Queen and the new 
born are in as prosperous a way as one can wish, of which you'l 
acquaint those freinds whom you see, with many kind compli- 
ments to them. Your letters of the 28th November and 8th De- 
cember were the more wellcome that I was impatient to hear 
from you, and in pain for my letter of the 31st of August to you, 
which I am glad arrived safe. 

" It is but too manifest in this conjuncture nothing but a for- 
reign force can doe the work effectually, and to begin it by halfs 
would be ruining all. It is my freinds bussiness to lie quiet, and 
to preserve themselves in a condition of being usefull on a pro- 
per occasion, 'tho that ought not to hinder them from useing 
their utmost endevours to thwart and oppose the measures of 
the Government in as far as that can be done without exposeing 
themselves to the lash of the law ; and indeed so far it is neces- 
sary they should exert themselves, since there is no other way 
left at present to keep up the spirit of the nation, and support 
the credit of the cause, which requires vigour as well as prudence 
in those concerned in it. And in the mean time from several in- 

* Received 17 May 1725. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 151 

formations I have had of late, I cannot but hope more than ever 
that the time of our deliverance is not far off, 'tho I fear scarcely 
to be expected this summer. 

" I am clayly more and more confirm'd in my former resolu- 
tion of withdrawing my confidence from Mar and all who may 
be influenced by him ; and there is more caution to be used with 
the last, that the other is at this time pretending a great zeal for 
my cause, by which he may still impose on some well meaning 
people. I am persuaded the two persons you ask me about are 
perfectly honest, but it is impossible for me to give you any par- 
ticular directions in relation to them, since your conduct to- 
wards them can only be regulated by the disposition you find in 
them, and what I have said above. You will have seen by In- 
verness 's letter, that I have declared him at last Secretary of Stale 
and a Peer of Scotland. I am persuaded I shall never have cause 
to repent of that step, nor my faithfull subjects to complain of it, 
for he is one who halh no other view in politicks, but to obey 
me in all things, and serve them where he can ; and the usage 
his Lady hath lately inett with, shews me the value even my ene- 
mies think I ought to putt upon him ; she was not charged with 
the least commission from me when she went over, and by the 
accounts I have, she has behaved her self with a great dale of 
firmity and courage. Kinnouls conduct has indeed been unac- 
countable ; 1 am ignorant what his correspondence might ever 
have been on this side of the sea, or thro whose hands it past, but 
I never had any with him my self, neither had his brother since 
they parted ; and even befor his late ill usage, and when he was 
lookt upon to be a stanch freind, I have heard Inverness com- 
plain of his excessive caution in never writing to him. 

" You will deliver the inclosed to the Bishop of Edinburgh ; 
which I hope will have the desired effect, and which answers 
that part of your letter which relates to Church matters. I have 
nothing furder to add at present but that your informations and 



152 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

advices will be always most agreeable to me, and that I shall 
ever have for you and your freinds all the value and friendship 
imaginable." 

A letter from the King to the Bishop of Edenburgh. 

"March 2 1st 1725. 

" I have been extreamly concern'd to hear of the variances 
and differences amongst you. You know how often I have re- 
commended peace and unity to you, and how necessary it is, 
particularly at this time, and therfor I cannot but repeat with all 
the earnestness imaginable my former instances in that respect. 
1 remark that the present cause of disturbance has arisen from 
difference of opinions as to the destination of those lately added 
to your number, and therfor, to prevent the like for the future, I 
shall expect from you, that befor you allote any particular diocess 
or province to any new Bishop, that you should acquaint my 
trustees with you of it, and inform me at the same time of the 
matter, and of your motives for so doing. I think this a most 
necessary precaution for the good of your Body, and in general 
for that of the good cause, both which must greatly suffer, should 
your present heats and divisions continue. I doubt not of your 
doing your best to quiet them, and I think I cannot give you and 
your bretheren a greater mark of my regard and esteem, than in 
acting this my part towards it, as I shall always doe in what 
may contribute to the wellfare of the Church of Scotland, and to 
convince you in particular, of my particular value and consi- 
deration." 

Letter to the King. 

" 24 May 1725. 

" This is in the first place to acknowledge the receipt of yours 
of the 21st March, as also one from Lord Inverness dated 10th 
March, to whom I can make no particular reply as I have no 
address to him. What is recommended shall be punctually ex- 
ecuted, and I may venture to assure you, that as your freinds have 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 1 53 

the same way of thinking with you concerning the present state 
of affairs and the necessity of both prudence and vigour on all 
proper occasions towards improving the good cause, they do not 
faill in doing all thats possible for them, and not allwayes with- 
out success. I wish heartily what you have in veiw may take 
effect, both for your and many poor unhappy peoples sake. 

" When I read your letter to Wigtoun, he told me that he was 
perfectlie well assured, that some years ago, when Kinnoul re- 
sided at Duplin and made great court to the honest party in 
Perthshire, he used frequently to read coppys of what he calld 
your letters to him, therby to appear a man of consequence and 
gain credit with them, in which he came good speed, being then 
as much liked as he is now despised. 

" What I mentiond formerlie concerning a letter from the Duke 
of Marr to Lord Dua was a mistake ; the letter was to Balmc- 
rinoch, and not signd, but by the contents (of which I gave you 
ane account) it appears to be from a wellvvisher of his, who 
seems likewise to be privy to his affairs and therfore presumable 
to have writ by his direction. Since my last, Eglinton has been 
with Major Walkinshaw, M ho came over at that Lords desire, be- 
cause his estate -which held of him having falln to him the supe- 
rior, by the late forfeiting act, his Lordship took possession therof 
for the others behoof and woud not dispose of it for paying the 
debts affecting it, but with the Majors concent and by his war- 
rand : as he thus had ane errand which those in France did not 
know of, it occasiond, I suppose, the suspicion of what was in that 
letter alledged to be his business. Eglinton tells me he talkd very 
fully with him and is very confident he had no such commission 
nor any business but his own. I perceive some of Mars freinds 
were disappointed when they found this out, for they were at 
great pains to discover the nature of his commission, in hopes it 
woud appear not to be authorised by nor in terms agreeable to 
you, on which a fonuall complaint was to've been made to you. 

VOL. II. X 



1 54 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

I met lately Lord Dun who told me he was sorry to hear that his 
cheif was in disgrace with you, that he hoped in time his inno- 
cence woud appear, otherwayes he shoud be as far as any man 
from defending him, and in the mean time he thought the less 
noise that was made of it the better : he askd me if I had heard 
lately from you : I therupon mentiond what directions you had 
givn about the Bishops and some such generall points, endea- 
vouring to give him as litle reason as possible to. think I was 
more cautious than formerlie with him, which I take to be suit- 
able to the directions you gave in regulating our conduct with 
such as he. 

" Twill take some time to know what is truely designd against 
the Highlanders; thers a formidable appearance making against 
them, with what intent God knows: I understand they design 
to give up a quantity of their old arms, but at all hazards will 
keep as many of the best as will be needmll when a fair occa- 
sion offers. 

" I gave you a few dayes ago ane account of H. Stratons death, 
my letter dated the 8th instant went by the common post to Mr. 
Dundass, because I had no occasion of a ship from Leith and did 
not incline to lose any time in acquainting you of it : however it 
was so writ as to be of no consequence if intercepted. In it I 
told you all his papers were secured ; but I am now to inform 
you that last week his wife, by the advice of Balmerinoch, burnt 
all that had any relation to you or your freinds affairs. This, 
Ime affraid, was too precipitant a step ; for beside that some let- 
ters may come from you which no body now can tell what they 
contain, it will take a considerable time before you can adjust 
the method of corresponding with those that went thorow Stra- 
tons hands, but in so far as I can supply that defect in the in- 
terim, your commands shall be very welcome and punctually 
obeyd by me, in case you have orders to transmit and I can be 
of use in executing them. In my last I mentiond your directing 

.11 .JO'/ 



REGISTER OP LETTERS* 155 

for the future to Corsar instead of Straton and giving- orders to 
Dundass to forward them to him, but since my writing, severall 
of your trustees met and thought it more adviseable that your 
address shoud continue as formerlie, because the canall by which 
your letters came was well laid, and Mrs. Straton is directed and 
hath undertaken to receive the dispatches and give them to Cor- 
sar, and as she is a worthy sensible woman, she'l perform it very 
exactlie and with great caution, and Corsar has writ so to Dun- 
dass. These trustees had also under consideration that tho Cor- 
sar is a very proper person to receive and convey your letters, 
yet they did not think he had such experience and address in bu- 
siness as were necessary in your immediate correspondent here 
for negotiating affairs, perhaps of intricacy, that you might have 
occasion to committ to him, and for that reason they turned their 
thoughts to find out one that they coud recommend to you, as 
capable to discharge the trust, and whose circumstances woucl 
allow him to do it, because at the distance you are you coud not 
but from hence be apprized of these particulars, and at last they 
unanimouslie pitched upon Captain Simon Frazer. If you have 
forgot the name, youl probably remember him when your ac- 
quainted that having made his escape after being made prisoner 
at Preston, he came to France wher he remaind till you allowd 
him to attend my son in his travails and was with him at Rome. 
He's a gentelman of ane untainted charactar, of good sense, has 
seen much of the world and capable to manage affairs of the 
greatest importance, and as he's by birth ane Highlander and 
speaks their language, tis probable he'l be acceptable to the peo- 
ple of that country : wee have got him into a litle business that 
will afford him a confortable subsistance till times turn better, 
and his residence will be close at Edenburgh, so that he'l be al- 
wayes at hand to receive your orders. I have writ of this sub- 
ject to Mr. Gordon of Glenbucket, who's now in the north, and 
as soon as I get his return and have seen the Duke of Hainiltou 



156 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

and some more of your trustees, I shall acquaint yon of their 
opinions with their severall names and then youl be able to judge 
and determine as you think proper. I spoke of it to Frazer ; he 
seemd out of modestie to decline it, but withall declared, he 
reckond it his duty to obey you in all things, tho he was con- 
scious of his incapacity to do you the service you might possibly 
expect and which he woud perform were it in his powr. 

" I know of ane occasion in a short time after this, and by it 
I shall acquaint you of what I may be furder directed to lay be- 
fore you for your service, and at this time I have only to add 
that I am with the most profound respect and greatest sincerity 
Yours." 

For these severall years by past the Ministry had keept the 
two opposite partys of Argyle and the Squadrone pritty equall in 
power, so that both concurrd heartily with the measures of the 
Court, in hopes sooner or latter to get the better of their rivalls ; 
but about the end of May 1725 a great many of the Squadrone 
were turnd out of their employments, and Argyle carried all be- 
fore him. Amongst those laid aside were Mr. Dundass the Kings 
advocat and the two solicitors, Mr. Duncan Forbes succeeding 
the first, and Mr. Charles Areskine the others. This change was 
talked of sometime before it hapned, but Dundass did not credit 
it and therfore did not oppose the Court as he might and shoud 
have done, and when he left London he had King Georges pro- 
mise to continue in his post ; but he was not long in Scotland 
ere he found that a minors promise, without the concent of his 
guardians, is of no value. On his fall he pretended it was oc- 
casiond by his not being hearty for the malt tax and because 
his freincls in the shire of Edinburgh had concurrd in the mea- 
sures against it : and tho I belive ther was very litle in this pre- 
tence, yet people were content to let it pass in order to draw him 
on, being a very cliver fellow and full of ambition and revenge. 
Great endeavours were used to have the Duke of Roxbrugh laid 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 157 

aside from being secretary of state, but King George stood ob- 
stinately for him and it was reported that he desired Mr. Wai- 
pole to let the Duke continue and hed engage he shoud do what 
was desired of him. At the same time they slighted him in all 
matters, advising and informing him of nothing that was done, 
but he dissappointecl them and woud not show his resentment so 
far as to demilt ; however in some months therafter, they carried 
their point and got him removed from his office. I cannot as* 
sign a reason for bringing this turn about, but it was generally 
belived that Walpole, who governd all at St. James's, either fear- 
ing some storm from the Lord Carteret supported by 

King Georges favourite mistress, or designing some bold stroke, 
judged it necessary to tye down Argyle to his interest, by grati- 
fying him Avith the suppression of the other party; and he on the 
other hand undertook for himself and his party that the malt tax 
shoud be submitted to and paid in Scotland, towards accomplish- 
ing wherof they left no means unattempted. Thus the English 
Ministry playd the 2 partys upon one another at the expence of 
the poor countrie ; for the Squadrone were introduced into the 
powr from whence they were now dismissd, by undertaking to 
support the commissioners of inquiry into the forfeited estates. 

About this time Mr. P. llaldane presented a letter nominating 
him a Lord of the Session. This gentleman had been one and 
indeed the most violent of the commissioners of inquiry into the 
forfeited estates, in the prosecution wherof he had acted with the 
utmost virulencie, had spoke most disrespectfully of the Lords of 
Session and aimd at nothing less than demolishing that court ; 
by which he was odious to the whole nation. When his letter 
was presented, the Dean and Facultie of Advocats offevd a remon- 
strance to the Lords of Session against receiving him, because he 
had not served as a lavver at the bar such a number of years as 
was directed by the law, praevious to any lawers being in a ca- 
pacity to be made a judge. For tho the number of years was 



1 58 REGISTER CF LETTERS. 

elapsed since lie first enterd advocat, yet he had not served so 
long- at the bar (and consequently coud not attain the knowledge 
and experience necessary in a judge and designd from the ser- 
vice required by the law) having deserted the same when he en- 
terd into the publick service and continued altogather therm for 
severall years. 

Mr. Haldane replyd that he had almost every session appeard 
at the bar and that the law did not require close and constant 
attendance, besides, his absence being reipiiblicce causa, ought 
not to be applyed to his prejudice. 

This question was strenouslie debated by the Kings lawers for 
the making good the rights of the Crown in- naming Haldane, 
and by the Facultie in opposition to him, and it was carried on 
with great zeall, the Lords favouring the Facultie very much. 
Before it was determined, another question arose, whether or not 
the extraordinary Lords coud vote in judging of the qualifica- 
tions and capacity of ane ordinary Lord. Being affraid to deter- 
mine this point, they remited it to the King and Parliament (a 
new unprecedented sentence) and on it the whole depended ; 
for in the vote that was stated on the main question, Haldane 
lost it by one amongst the ordinary Lords, but carried it by one, 
if the extraordinary Lords votes w ere sustaind. 

This put oft' the affair that session and keept out Haldane till 
it was determined above by the House of Lords in favours of the 
extraordinary Lords, on ane appeall lodged against the delay by 
the Kings advocat in name of the Crown. Haldane having ther- 
upon insisted on his being admitted, addresses were procured 
with great secresie from severall hundereds of persons of all ranks 
in all parts of the kingdom, against admitting him, being a per- 
son of a bad charactar and vile practices, which they oiterd to 
prove ; and as the Lords of Session are vested with a power to 
judge into the charactar and capacity of such as are presented to 
that office, they received the addresses and admitted the proofs to 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 159 

be heard against him, when severall persons appeard and laid 
severall things to his charge (and amongst others his drinking 
King James's health, and sundry other things incident to youth, 
from which perhaps few of the Judges were free, were their lives 
as narrowlie expiscated) which took up so much time as to spin 
out that other session, and some time therafter the Ministry con- 
sidering that the forcing in a judge over the bellys of the coun- 
try was very unpopular, dropt him, and in his stead presented 
Mr. Fletcher of Salton jun. 

Soon after the Parliament had finishd the rnalt tax bill, an- 
other was moved and brought in for dissarming of the High- 
landers. In summer 1724 General Wade came to Scotland and, 
under the pretence of reveiwing the troops and garisons, made a 
progress throwout allmost the whole kingdom ; and as it was re- 
marked that he was at great pains to veiw and observe narrowlie 
all the passes, especially in the Highlands, and to get exact 
charactars of all persons of rank and distinction, every body ap- 
prehended ther was some design against this countrie, which was 
then concealld, and tis probable it was forwarded by the oppo- 
sition made last winter to the malt tax; for in the spring 1725 
this bill for disarming the Highlanders was brought into the 
House of Commons, containing severall clauses that, if duelie 
executed, woud bring these people under the greatest hardships, 
contrary to all law reason or equity. Severall of the English 
members opposed it and got some of the clauses, such as the pro- 
hibition of wearing the Highland garb, to be dropl ; but not so 
much as one Scotsman had the honestie and courage to appear 
in behalf of their oppressd countriemen ; nay the bill was brought 
in by Duncan Forbes (for which and other meritorious jobs he 
was soon after made Lord Advocat) and supported by the Duke 
of Argyle and all his dependants, so it past both Houses and was 
made a law. The English Ministery having no hopes of ever 
bringing the Highlanders over to their measures, looked upon 



160 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

them as a considerable body of brave fellows, innured to arms, 
that woud probably join any enemy forreign or domestick that 
shoud happen to aim at subverting the present setlement of the 
Goverment, and therfore resolved either to extirpate them, or 
at least, by disarming them, bring them in time to forget the 
nse of arms and to be of a less warlike disposition, and with 
such veiws pushed this bill and concerted the measures that fol- 
io wd upon it. But whatever considerations moved the English, 
it was odd that the Duke of Argylc shoud enter into such pro- 
jects; the many powrs, priviledges, jurisdictions and enlarge- 
ment of lands (such as no other family enjoyd) were beslowd by 
the Crown as rewards, or more effectually to enable his predeces- 
sors to curb the power of the Highland clans, who under the di- 
rection of their cheiftans in old times committed great devasta- 
tions in the Low Countrys and even enterd into leagues with the 
kings of England against their native prince ; and he, as well as 
all other men, coud not but see that if this formidable power of 
the Highlanders was removed, he was of less consequence to the 
Goverment, as tlicr was less use for his service ; and tho King 
George, by this act, was empow'red to exempt such as he pleased 
from being comprehended under it, and that consequentlie His 
Grace was in no hazard of having his people disarmed, yet what 
was now done to others woud stand as a precedent for using him 
and his in the same manner, as it was ane English measure, or 
might be retalliate on him upon ane alteration of the Ministry, 
when it might be thought proper to gratifye those that coped 
with him and his family and grudged that he and his followers 
shoud be in a better state than others. But the truth on't is, this 
Duke hath in all matters acted as if he only considered the pre- 
sent time and had no regard or concern for futurity. 

In consequence of this law, Wade was made Commander in 
cheif of all the forces and garisons in Scotland, and all ships of 
war that came upon the coast thcrof were to obey his orders, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 161 

and he had a powr to build forts wher he pleased. In short his 
commission was of such a nature, that none so extensive had 
before been heard of in Scotland or, I belive, in England since 
the grand rebellion. Under him were appointed severall gene- 
rall. officers, and troops sent from England, which, with those 
before in Scotland, were marchd north to form a camp at Inver- 
ness, and frigots were appointed to have their stations on the 
coasts and wait the Generalls orders; and matters in general! 
were carried on as if ane open enemy had been in the feilds arid 
ready to oppose them. These formidable preparations (at a great 
charge) were made about the month of June 1725, for putting 
in execution this act against the Highlanders, the only remains 
of the true old Scots blood and spirit : But when all things were 
prepared and readie for executing the Goverrnents designs, a de- 
lay was occasiond by the mob which hapned at Glasgow. 

Some litle time before the 23d of June (on which day the 
malt tax commenced) delegates were sent from most of the 
considerable touns, to meet and confer with the brewars at Edin- 
burgh, where many proposalls were made for eluding the law, to 
be, as occasions offerd, put in practice : the first thing to be 
guarded against was the dutys of malt stock in hand ; and to 
avoid the heavie penaltie of not entering the same, it was re- 
solved to obey the law in that respect, but at the same time not 
to make payment of the duty theron, and if the Commissioners of 
excise sued them, to give over brewing and consequently sink 
the revenue of excise, which was indeed cheiflie aimd at by those 
who bestirrd themselves at this time in behalf of the country, 
that the Goverment might perceive theyd lose more of the excise 
than they coud gain by the malt tax : but what allarumd people 
most was the unreasonable article of surcharge, to be levyed pro- 
portionally off of such as entered and paid the duty of what was 
malted after 23d of June, in so far as the clear produce (after 
deducing the charges of collecting) fell short of 20000/. sterling, 

VOL. II. Y 



162 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

wherby those who submitted to the Goverment and paid the malt tax 
ran the hazard of making up the deficiencie arisingfrom those who 
did otherwise, which so startled all the considerable brewars, who 
generally speaking are also maltsters, that they found it absolutely 
necessary to malt none after the commencement of this duty. 

On the 23d of June, when the duty took place, the excise of- 
ficers were obliged to fly out of most of the towns in the western 
shires, but in Glasgow the resentment ran higher. Daniell Camp- 
bell of Shawfeild, who represented that borrow in Parliament, 
having incurrd the hatred of the inhabitants therof, because he 
was belivecl, on too good grounds, to have had the chcif hand 
in giving the Goverment such informations of the way and man- 
ner of trading there, as occasiond a few years ago ane act of 
Parliament, that lay heavie on their tobacco trade, was like- 
wayes said and belived to have encouraged the Ministry to hope 
ther was no difficultie in raising the malt tax ; and these joind 
togather rendered him detestable over all the kingdom, especially 
at Glasgow, wher they threatned to pull down his new built 
house, wherof he sent notice to Wade at Edinburgh on 21st of 
June, who therupon ordered a detachment of foot to march furth- 
with thither, wher they arrived on the 24th at night, but the 
guard room being unprepared, they put off taking possession of 
it till next day, the souldiers being dismist to their severall pri- 
vate quarters. During the night time a report went about that 
Daniell Campbell had brought these souldiers to enslave them, 
wherupon the mob got up and destroyd his house, and had he 
himself been in town, they had certainly dewitted him. Whilst 
this was in hand the commanding officer got his men togather, 
took possession of the guard room and drew up before it, and 
tho he met with no insult but from some boyes and women, who 
threw a few stones at his men, without having previouslie read 
the proclamation, as directed by the law on such occasions, he 
fired allongst the streets, which being full of innocent people 



REGISTER OP LETTKRSJ 163 

that came out of curiosity to know what the matter was, and 
the windows at the same time crowded with spectators, about 
20 men and women were killd dead and many more wound- 
ed, some wherof in the streets and others in their houses : the 
citizens being therby enraged did ring the fire bell and brake up 
the magazine, from whence they armed about 400 men. In the 
mean time the magistrates advised the officer to march off his 
party, for they coud not be protected within the city ; on which 
he made the best of his way to Dumbarton, but not thinking him- 
self safe in that town he retired into the castle. The Glasgow 
mob pursued him a few miles but coud not overtake him. This 
story made a mighty noise, and Wade sent ane express with ane 
account to the Lords Justices (King George being then in Ger- 
many) and they orderd him to march troops to take possession 
of the town and secure the peace. At the same time they wrot 
a letter of condoleance to Campbell, assuring him they woud 
resent what had befaln him as in effect done to King George 
himself. Wade, according to his orders, sent a good body of 
foot, some troops of dragoons and a train of ordinance and made 
preparations as if ane enemy was to oppose him in the feilds or 
the town to stand a seige : alongst with the General went the 
Lord Advocat to take a precognition (that is ane examination of 
witnesses but not upon oath) of what had hapned, and they en- 
terd the town without any opposition. By the precognition it 
appeard plainly that the magistrates had done their duty, by en- 
deavouring all in their powr to disperse the mob, but severall 
persons were takn up on suspicion and sent prisoners to Edin- 
burgh, in all about of the meanest rank. Tho the magis- 
trates had fully justifyd their conduct, and the Generall and Lord 
Advocat seemd satisfy ed and on good terms with them, whilst 
they were enquiring into what had past and were taking up 
others, yet no sooner was that work over, than they committed 

Y2 



1 64: REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

the Provost and . other magistrates to the town prison, and 
from thence next day conveyd them under a strong guard to 
Edinburgh Tolbooth, attended by a great number of the cheif 
citizens of Glasgow. This set of magistrates had at the preceed- 
ing Michelmass election undermined and turnd out Campbells 
freinds,who had enhanced the Goverment for many years, and 
being some of them, particularly Provost Aird, under pay, were 
mere tools to him ; and this was thought a proper occasion to 
squeeze them and if possible to replace Campbells set. The 
Glasgow magistrates having applyd by a petition were quickly 
by the Lords of Justiciary admitted to bail. This commitment 
was in all respects arbitrary and illegall, in regard the Lord Ad- 
vocat, as such, is not since the Union vested with the power of 
commitment any more than the Atturney General of England* 
and tho he qualify ed himself as a justice of the peace in the shire 
of Lanark, it was thought a litle too presuming and a bad pre- 
cedent that so inferior a judge shoud claim and exercise ane au- 
thority over such considerable persons as the magistrates of Glas- 
gow within the limits of their own jurisdiction, and that only 
upon suspicion or presumptions and when they offerd to find bail 
to appear when and where they shoud be required : beside, as a 
justice of the peace in that shire his warrand coud go no further 
than the bounds therof, wheras these prisoners were carried tho- 
row the shires of Stirling, Linlithgow and Edinburgh, and in 
the Tolbooth of that town confined. These proceedings opend 
the eyes of most people and enraged the good folks of Glasgow 
to the greatest degree; they had manifested ane extravagant zeall 
for the Revolution principles and party ever and on all occasions 
since 1688, and particularly had been at great charges in levying 
providing and subsisting two regiments of foot which they sent to 
Stirling in 1715 ,and they litle expected to be thus handled by 
the party they had so zealouslie served and who formerly encou- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 165 

raged and protected them in their mobbish outrages upon the 
Episcopall clergy &c. 

Some short time before these matters hapned the President of 
the Session shewd a more than ordinary concern to bring the 
malt tax to bear, being, as was said, very desirous to serve and 
oblige the Ministry, that he might be allowd to demit his office 
and obtain a yearlie pension of 1000Z. sterling during his life and 
his second son to succeed Lord Grange who by this scheme was 
to be President : whatever was his motive he overuled the other 
Lords so much, that tho many of them were of a different mind, 
he procured ane act of sederunt to be made and publislid, by 
which all brewars and retailers of ale in Edinburgh and suburbs 
Avere required to sell the same at a certain higher price than for- 
merlie, with a veiw of gratifying the brewars, who, getting thus a 
larger profile, might have wherwithall to pay the dutys on malt 
and make no difficulties in carrying on their business. This step 
was justifyed and pretended to be legall, from a power vested in 
the Lords of Session to regulate the prices of victualls and liquors 
in Edinburgh ; but as that was only to prevent their being sold 
too dear, it was the first instance and by all reckond ridicolous in 
them to pretend that they coud even raise the prices. Tho the 
brewars knew this contrivance was to favour them, they were at 
the same time sensible it tended to rivett the malt tax and conse- 
quentlie to ruin the countrie, and therfore gave no obedience 
to this act; and being calld togather by the Lord Advocat, they 
told him theyd continue to brew whilst their malt stock in hand 
lasted, but if they were sued for the dutys therof theyd shut up 
their breweries and rather go to prison than comply ; and having 
by this time vastly diminished the weeklie quantity they used to 
brew, this occasiond so great a decrease of the revenues arising 
from the excise to the Goverment and town of Edinburgh, that 
the advocat and magistrates were highlie enraged, and the first 
laid a complaint before the Lords of Session (or rather the trustie 



166 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

president) against the brewars as combining and resolving to 
put a stop to brewing for the future; and their Lordships thought 
fit to make ane other act, as irregular as the former, declairing 
it was inconsistent with the publick welfare and therfore illegall 
for the brewars alltogather to quit and forbear the exercise of 
their occupations, and requiring them to continue and carry on 
their trade in the manner and to the extent they had done for 
the space of one month preceeding the date viz 29th July, 
untill the 1st of November, and that for the space of three 
months therafter none of them shoud leave of brewing untill 15 
dayes after having intimated the design to the magistrates of 
Edinburgh by a publick nottary, and lastly ordaining a certain 
number of brewars, containd in a list signd by the president 
(whicli indeed comprehended the whole in and about Edinburgh) 
to be cited to appear next day and each enact himself by a bond 
in the terms aforesaid under thepenaltie of 100/. sterling, threat- 
ning withall severely to punish such as did not comply. Next 
day the brewars presented a petition, shewing that to require and 
compell private persons to enter into bonds under penalties, was 
by the claim of right declared to be a grivance, and to oblige 
them to follow ane employment to their loss and the ruin of their 
familys was authorised by no law and justifyed by no precedent; 
for which and severall other reasons set forth in the petition they 
desired to be excused that they refused to perform what was re- 
quired by that act. As this petition was conceived in pritty smart 
terms and exposed the proceedings of the Lords as illegall arbi- 
trary and unwarrantable, they were highlie provoked and or- 
daind the petition to be burnt by the common hangman ; after 
which the brewars being calld to the bar, they all refused, ex- 
cept one Baily Simpson, to sign the bond required of them, wher- 
upon the Lords by another act ordaind that such of the brewars 
containd in the aforesaid list as did not enact themselves in the 
terms of the aforesaid act of sederunt in presence of the ma- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 167 

gistrates of Edinburgh betwixt and the 10th of August next, 
shoud be committed to prison and there remain till the first of 
November or in the interim enacted in the terms required. For 
the space of about three weeks after this, matters were in sus- 
pence, but the Earl of Hay (sent by the Ministry to give direc- 
tions in this affair) no sooner arrived at Edinburgh, than most 
of the brewars were cited before the justices of the peace, at the 
instance of the commissioners of excise, to make payment of 
the dutys of malt stock in hand, on which they all left off brew- 
ing, and immediatly therafler four of these vize Cave, Lindsay ? 
Scot and Cleghorn were, by virtue of the last act of sederunt, 
thrown into prison. Here it is to be observed that new commis- 
sions of the peace were about this time sent to all the shires in 
Scotland, which were cramm'd full of people that the Ministry 
knew woud be usefull tools ; and wheras the town and shire of Edi n- 
burgh woud prove a leading example to others, the magistrates 
got severall who depended on them, some wherof were not he- 
retors, to be put into the commission for that shire ; the Lords of 
Session, Barons of Exchequer, the Advocat and Solicitor were 
also appointed, virtute officy, to be justices in all shires, and a 
great many officers of the army were named in the commissions 
on the north side of the river of (for the better executing 

of the dissarming act as well as levying the malt lax) ; and in- 
deed had not the Ministry foreseen and thus provided against 
what was probably to happen, it woud have been no easie mat- 
ter to have levyed the dutys on malt, for very few of the country- 
gentlemen accepted of the office : nevertheless those few in the 
shire of Edinburgh who undertook this servile task (being sup- 
ported by Carpenters dragoons, brought on purpose from En- 
gland and quarterd in the suburbs and neighbourhead of Edin- 
burgh, in which place they patroled for sevrall nights and made 
frequent parades thorow the streets to intimidate the people) 
proceeded against the brewars, and on the 25 of August decernd 



1 68 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

them in double dutys, on their craving a delay till next session 
of Parliament and refusing to pay or give bonds. At the same 
time no pains nor means were ominitted to perswade them to com- 
ply, being cajoled and threatned by the President and those in 
concert with him. Amongst other devices, Mr. Wightman, one 
of the city magistrates, commonly calld Nosie Wightman, con- 
veend some few of them togather, and proposing to call upon 
God in prayer for direction in so weightie ane affair, he fell to 
work and launched out into raptures, as if inspired to denounce 
judgements on those that contributed or were accessory in dis- 
turbing the peace of this mild and gracious goverment ; which, 
with the powerfull influence of a purse of gold (as was confir, 
dcntly affirmd and credited) had such irresistable effects, that 
they agreed to enact themselves, as required by the Lords of Ses- 
sion, and give bills for the duty of malt stock in hand, provided 
the Lord Hay engaged the payment shoud be superseded till the 
Parliament met. When these few broke off, those who were in 
prison and the rest who stood it out thought it'needless for them 
to expose themselves when the concert was broke, so they com- 
plyd likewise. It was a great pity that this hapned, for the whole 
nation was following their example of not brewing, which woud 
have intirely sunk the flourishing revenue of excise; and I was 
credibly informed that if the brewars had stood their ground a 
very few dayes longer, Hay, according to his instructions, rather 
than drive matters to extremitys, woud have produced orders for 
superseding the execution of the malt tax act. But after all it 
was scarce to be expected that the brewars of Edinburgh, a com- 
pany of private men, shoud dare or be in a condition to stand 
out against the united efforts of the Ministry and their creatures, 
when they were so far from being supported in a cause that was 
truely nationall, that they met with all manner of discourage- 
ments from the vigourous assaults of some and the remiss negli- 
gence and unbecoming indifference of others. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 169 

Soon after the peace of Glasgow was secured, Wade went north 
to Inverness, wher he found a camp formd, and quicklie after his 
arrivall he summond in the Highland clans: of his conduct and 
what hapned there the following letters to the King contain ane 
account; but before I proceed to them I must insert a letter * which 
1 received from him. 

"June 23d 1725. 

*' I was very impatient to hear from you, when I received 
your 2 letters of the 27 of March and 8 of Aprile; and the long 
account you give me of the methods you take to advance my 
interest are new proofs to me of your diligent application as well 
as your skill in cultivating the minds of my subjects and giving 
them a true sence of their reall interest and the good of their 
country. The dispositions you inform me that the malt tax, 
proposed by the English Goverment, left them in, I am perswaded 
is not diminished by the design it seems to have against my faith- 
full subjects in the Highlands, and I am perswaded even those in 
the Low Countries will be sensible of the dissadvantage it will 
be to them, shoud the Highlanders be dissabled and rendered 
useless to my antient kingdom. I find they are of opinion that 
nothing less than utter ruin is designd for them, and those on 
this side are perswaded that the English Goverment will meet 
with the greatest difficulties in executing their projects and that 
the clans will unanimouslie agree to oppose them to the last, and 
if tlierby circumstances will allow them to do nothing for my 
service, that they will still, by a capitulation, be able to procure 
better terms to themselves than they can propose by lea veing them- 
selves at the Goverments mercy and delivering up their arms: 
and if so, I am resolved, and I think I owe it to them, to do all 
in my powr to support them, and the distance I am at has obliged 
me to give my orders accordingly, and nothing in my power 



Received 13 July 1725. 

VOL. n. z 



170 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

shall be wanting to enable them to keep their ground against the 
Goverment, at least till they can procure good terms for them- 
selves, tho at the same time I must inform you, that the opposition 
they propose to make may prove of the greatest advantage to my 
interest, considering the hopes I have of forreign assistance, 
which perhaps you may hear of even before, you receive this let- 
ter. I shoud not have ventured to call the Highlanders togather 
without a certainty of their being supported, but the great pro- 
bability their is of it, makes me not at all sorry they shoud take 
the resolution of defending themselves and not delivering up their 
arms, which woud have rendered them in a great measure use- 
less to their countrie; and as the designs of the Goverment are 
represented to me, the laying doun of their arms is only to be the 
forerunner of other methods that are to be taken to extirpate 
their race for ever. They are certainly in the right to make the 
Goverment buy their slavery at as dear a rate as they can. The 
distance I am at and the imperfect accounts I have had of this 
law have been very unlucky: however, the orders I have sent to 
France I hope will not come too late, and I can answer for the 
diligence in the execution of them, which is all I can say to you 
at present from hence. 

" You may be sure I had good reason for the directions I sent 
you about Mar; as to the letter you inform me he has wrot to a 
certain person, I have reason to belive that what he represents is 
not all fact; their are some articles laid to his charge that coud 
not be hid and that are no wayes the produce of malice: I wish 
it may be, as he sayes, that his innocence will appear in due time 
as well as his fidelity to me; at least he has committed the greatest 
mistakes. It is almost impossible to hinder people from writing: I 
thought it was sufficient to remove my confidence from him and 
to direct my freinds to do the same, without forming any accu- 
.sation or the like. I am far from thinking that the Bishop of 
Rochester sent Major Walkinshaw to Scotland ; I do not belive 

.5 ! ..107 



REGISTER OE LETTERS. 171 

he ever saw him or has any acquaintance with him, and I can be 
possitive neither he nor any belonging to me gave him mony for 
his journey: He askd my leave to go over about his own private 
affairs, and tho I have a very good opinion of him, yet his situation 
at home made me not think it safe to employ him in my affairs. 
Inverness gave him a commission to enquire about a particular 
affair transacted formerlie, of which I doubt not youl be informed, 
if you had any concern in it. It was industriouslie spread about 
that he was seized by the Govermerit, but since you say nothing 
of it Ime hopefull its not so. 

" Ime hopefull you have received long ere now mine of the 21 
March, wher I sent you enclosed such a letter for the Bishop of 
Edinburgh as you desired. I have ane account from Paris that 
Harry Straton is dead, which I am heartily sorry for, since I shall 
have lost ane old and faithfull servant ; I shall not give intire 
credite to it untill it be confirmd from Scotland. I pray God 
that some lucky event may happen to dissipate all the divisions 
that are amongst you, and that my faithfull subjects may be di- 
verted from them by ane hearty union amongst themselves in the 
service of their country. I send this by your new address, and 
you may be assured that my constant kindness shall ever attend 
you." 

Letter to the King. 

"July 13, 1725. 

" Sir, About the midle of last month a large packet was 
brought by the master of a ship from France to Leith, directed 
and delivered to Lord Balmerinoch: It containd a narrative of the 
grounds of difference betwixt the Duke of Mar and the Bishop 
of Rochester and Mr. Hay, in which is a large vindication of the 
Dukes conduct; and thereto are annexed coppys of several! let- 
ters to and from him (as vouchers for what is asserted hi the nar- 
rative) and likewise of the scheme laid before the Regent of 
France by the said Duke, and his letter accompanying it. In this 



172 REGISTER OP LETTERS- 

packet ther was also a letter unsignd directed to the Lord Bal~ 
inerinoch, signifying that this narrative was sent for the Dukes 
vindication and thcrfore desiring him to shew it to such persons 
as he thought proper, but withall expresslie restraining him from 
giving any coppys therof. His Lordship having sliown it to 
Lords Panraure and Kincardine and myself, wee thought it very 
proper to transmit r ane account therof to you, that you might 
judge how far the facts he affirms are true, tlie vouchers he pro- 
duces genuin, and the constructions he puts upon them candid. 
The said narrative &c. being a few hours in our hands, wee 
perused them very seriouslie, took such notes, and made such ob- 
servations as enabled us to make ane abstract therof containing 
the sum and substance of what was most materiall therin, which 
I was directed to send to you in a seperate packet ; when it comes 
to your hands you will find it signd with the name of Butterflye. 
" I am directed to let you know that some of your freinds have 
a jealousie that a sum of mony raised here (about 200f/. I be- 
live) and remitted to France, anno 1722 or therby, has not been 
communicated to you or was not applyed as you intended. The 
ground of their jealousie arises, from the extraordinary method 
takn in managing the collection here ; for Captain Straton, who 
received the instructions about it from abroad, did not acquaint 
any of your trustees here of the matter (except Eglinton who con- 
tributed 500/. sterling) which not only prevented their own con- 
tributions, but also what they might have collected from others. 
In short, Straton keept the affair a mighty secret from all such 
as he imagined woud be inquisitive to know how or to whom it 
was to be remitted or had no particular attachment to JVJar, to 
whom he himself seemd to be very much wedded, even in these 
latter dayes, notwithstanding your letters about him. In the next 
place, tho it was afterwards said this fund was to be imployd 
in buying arms &c. in Holland, yet it seems neither Mr. Dundass, 
who did provide some there about that time, (as is reported here) 





REGISTER OF LETTERS. 173 

hor Thomas Sinclair, who laid out his litle stock that way and 
has a fitted account signd by Mar, have either of them got a 
farthing, the want of which has intirely broke the credite of the 
first, at least prevented his re-establishing it, and the other, with 
his numerous family, is reduced to great wants. This your freinds 
thought fit to lay before you, seing the least jeolousie of misap- 
plications of such subjects is a great discouragement to those 
who can and are willing to serve you on proper occasions. 

" As I was so far advanced yesterday in this letter I received 
yours of the 23d of June, and what I, before that, was design- 
ing to write to you will in some measure suffice for ane an- 
swer to it. What in my former letters I told you woud pro- 
bably be the event of the malt tax has come to pass, [what fol- 
lowd was ane account of the Glasgow affair which I have for- 
merlie related and need not here repeat] I cant express the ge- 
nerall discontent ; this western affair must tend to good, for if 
the Goverment pass it over, twill encourage others to do the 
like or more, and if they resent it and take any lives, that, with 
the blood alreadie spilt, will leave a sting behind, and I look on 
Argyles interest in that his favourite toun and the west to be 
sunk, as he and his partie are blamed for being too instrumentall 
in imposing this odious tax, which has alreadie so soured and 
altered peoples minds, that I do verily belive, were the affairs of 
Europe in such a situation as it were proper to make the experi- 
ment, twoud be a very easie matter at this juncture to drive oui 
oppressors out of the country and regain our liberties. I can 
appeall to you that I do not use to exagerate matters, and ther- 
fore I may be the more credited, when I say so much, which I 
mention in hopes it may be a further incitement to secure and 
hasten the assistance you seem so hopefull speedily to obtain. 
This western affair will I hope have another good effect, which 
Ime sure will be exceeding pleasing to you, viz. that it will save 
the Highlanders for this time ; for the sending 3 regiments to 



174 REGISTER OF LETTER?. 

Glasgow and the Generalls being dctaind will so retard his ex- 
pedition, and the weather withall is so rainie, that in all proba- 
lity the season will pass before any thing to purpose can be 
done against these poor people. It is indeed probable that the 
Governments designs were very pernicious, tho I cant tell but the 
whole cheiflie may be a contrivance to make a money job of it to 
some favourites, for this expedition is to cost the Goverment a 
good round sum to very litle purpose I hope. Tho the prepara- 
tions are formidable as if they knew of ane enemy to meet them 
in the feilds, yet I know very well that Wade is taking all the 
pains he can to accommodate matters, having for that purpose 
sent for most of those about Edinburgh that had any interest with 
the Highlanders, particularly the M c kenzies, and represented to 
them, that if their freinds woud submit to the Goverment they 
ehoud be used with the greatest tenderness, and in due time all 
their cheits be pardond and restored, having a signd manuall 
from King George to that effect. These gentlemen having ther- 
upon sent such ane advice to the Highlanders, they refused to 
comply, particularly the M c kenzics, who answered theyd receive 
orders from none but the Marquis of Seaforth ; but within these 
few dayes tis confidently reported that mallei's are adjusted with 
His Lordship, and, what makes it the more probable, a servant 
of his came lately from France with the Governments pass, keept 
private, and was with the new Lord Advocat (Duncan Forbes) 
at Edinburgh, and from thence went north ; of this you may be 
assured ; but that thers any trealie of accommodalion or what 
may be the articles I cant pretend to tell ; tho I imagine they! 
consist of a promise, that the rents of the forfeited estates shall be 
paid henceforwards to the Goverment and their arms be deli- 
vered, which will be only such as are old and useless and will 
nevertheless be takn of their hands as a prodf of their obedience 
to the law. What conditions Seaforlh gets -to himself time must 
show; and indeed wee must wait a litle for the unridling and 



REGISTER OP LETTERS, 175 

confirmation of these and many other things. In the mean time, 
the situation of affairs in this countrie are just as youd wish them, 
if you can bring matters so to bear that ane attempt will in a 
litle time be made to restore you and releive your poor people 
from bondage. 

" I forget to say that I am assured by my honest old freind Sir 
James Sinclair (who's come lately from the furthest nothern parts 
and is trusted by severall of the chei ftans) that the clans were 
never so united, have made and laid up provisions, and resolved 
to stand it out to the last, if so be the accommodation spoke of 
prove not true. 

" I ommitted to tell you, that wee made a few remarks on the 
margine of the narrative. 

" I will keep this unseald till the ships just readie to sail, that 
if any thing happens I may add it, and you shall be sure to have 
accounts as matters cast up. I am with great deference &c." 



Abstract of a Narrative in justification of the Duke of Mar. 

The first part of the narrative, by way of introduction, mentions 
the great freindship that was established twixt Mar and Mr. Hay 
(now Lord Inverness), that the first showd a great regard for 
.him and took particular notice of him on all occasions: that to 
his good offices he owd the favour which the King shewd to- 
wards him : that he placed a great deall of confidence in him 
and did communicate and advise with him in most of his affairs 
and designs, and amongst others, the articles to be proposed to 
and which afterwards were approved of by the King in favours of 
Scotland, with respect to the constitution and goverment of that 
kingdom after his restoration, on which foundation their was af- 
terwards, by Mar, formed and laid before the Regent of France 
a scheme which has since made a great deall of noise ; which 
articles Hay did approve of. Hay having in proces of time lost 



176 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

much of his interest with arid falln under the displcausre of the 
King, did apply to Mar for his assistance and advice, and at the 
same time gave it as his own opinion that he slioud withdraw 
with his family from the Court: Mar in return assured him of all 
the good offices in his powr, and with the approbation of Gene- 
rail Dillon advised him to follow out the proposall he himself 
had made, being hopefull that in time, by the mediation of freinds, 
he might be restored to the Kings favour, and that the Queen 
woud drop her resentments against his wife Mrs. Hay. But Hay 
it seems expected Mars freindship woud have exerted itself more 
in his favours than a bare approving his own proposall, which it 
woud appear he had no design slioud be folio wd out ; from hence 
Hays first grudge against Mar had its rise. Hay came to Paris in 
September 1723, when dissembling any secret disgust at Mar, he 
made the utmost professions of freindship and regard for him } 
and Mar received him with all the kindness and tenderness ima- 
ginable; but Hay in the mean time was privately doing all in his 
powr to asperse him and ruin his charactar. Mar chalanged him 
upon it and he possitively refused it : but Mar finding that he 
continued to act that part, resolved and did actually brake up all 
corrispondence with him. When the Bishop of Rochester came 
to Paris, Mar waited on him and shewd him all the respect and 
civility in his powr, desiring to live in perfect freindship and con- 
fidence with him. He found the Bishop very ignorant of trans- 
actions and the state of the Kings affairs on that side of the wa- 
ter, and was therfore at the pains to draw up a narrative con- 
taining a full account of these matters, which he put into the 
Bishops hands and with it a letter dated 29th May 1724*, men- 
tioning, amongst other things, that he had sent him 12 bundles 
of papers, and not doubting but that from these lights the Bishop 
woud see how unjustly he had been accused by some malicious 



* This letter is amongst the voucher J. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 177 

people, and woud approve of his conduct. The Bishop returnd 
a letter to Mar dated June 5 1724*, wherin he mentions, that 
he had sent back all the papers and had communicated them to 
no soul living. This letter is writ in such ambigous terms, as if 
he did not incline at that time to declare his opinion and delayd 
directlie approveing or condemning Mars conduct till he met and 
conferrd with him: nevertheless in the narrative such a construc- 
tion is put on this letter as to inferr a justification in regard of 
Mars having the Kings approbation. Here tis to be observed the 
Bishop only mentions Mars having a praevious, at least a subse- 
quent approbation of these on that side of the water, without 
making any particular mention of the King. The narrative, in 
the remarks on these words of the Bishops letter, " a previous at 
least a subsequent approbation? takes notice that they referr to 
Mars having received the loan of a sum of mony from his old 
freind the Earl of Stairs, who understood he was in great straits 
sometime after his confinement at Geneve; tho this loan pro- 
ceeded merely from Stairs personall freindship to Mar, yet hap- 
ning without the Kings praevious knowledge occasiond the Bi- 
shops taking notice that the approbation was only subsequent to 
some of the transactions. Mar and the Bishop had after this se- 
veral! interviews alone, but the Bishop never enterd upon nor 
talked with him on these matters, but to others he did, to Mars 
prejudice, particularly insisting against a scheme which Mar had 
laid before the Regent. Mar having sometime after this a con- 
ference with the Bishop, he found him much altered from the 
temper he had reason to expect from what was containd in his 
first and 2d letters -f , and tho he soon perceived that the Bishop 
was resolved at any rate to brake with him, yet he continued to 
visit him, and tryed by all means to keep well with him ; but be- 



* This letter is amongst the vouchers. 
+ This 3d letter is not amongst the vouchers. 
VOL. II. 3 A 



178 KEGISTER OF LETTERS. 

ing informed that the Bishops malice proceeded even so far that 
he affirmd that his (Mars) laying these papers before him was 
a crime, he resolved to have no further doings with him, and so 
their corrispondence ended about June 1724. From this time 
forwards the Bishop accused Mar openlie of the greatest of crimes, 
and brought the Lord Launsdon as concurring with Mar in these 
measures. The pretended reason of the Bishops displeasure at 
Mar is founded on a letter writ by him to the Bishop, about the 
time he was sent prisoner to the Tower, that was by chance seized 
at the posthouse and produced as evidence against the Bishop, tho 
it containd nothing but expressions of kindness and civility. But 
the Bishops reall design is to seclude all but himself and Mr. 
Hay from the Kings favour and any concern in the management 
of his affairs. The Bishop accuses Mar and Launsdon of be- 
traying the Kings secrets to the British Goverment, on which ac- 
count they from thence received pensions ; and the proof which 
he brings against Mar is founded on the application which he 
made to his freinds to get free of his confinement at Geneve : of 
this transaction the narrative gives the following account. That 
Mar after 13 months confinement found himself in so bad a state 
of: health, that it was necessary he shoud go to the waters of 
Bourbon for the recovery therof, and having accordingly applyd 
did obtain an enlargement and permission from the states of 
Geneve, on this express condition, That he shoud not act or be 
concerned in any thing against the Goverment of Britain du- 
ring his abode in, France,* and shoud return when required to Ge- 
neve, if he did .not procure the said Governments allowance to re- 
main in France. Being thus dissmissed from Geneve, he made 
further application that he .might continue in France, which the 
said Govermfint i was willing to allow on Jis renewing the for- 
mer engagement of not acting against it ; and at the same time 
the said Goverment did furder offer, that the estate of his fa- 
mily shoud be restored to his son, and that in the interim, untill 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 179 

ane act of Parliament was procured for that effect, he himself 
should yearlie receive a pension of 2QOO/. sterling, over and above 
10001. of jointure paid to his Lady, his estate being valued at 
3000/. per annum. Mar being accustomed to advise with Ge- 
neral Dillon in all matters of importance, did communicate this 
affair to him, who advised him to accept of it, because if he re- 
fused such advantageous terms, they woud stop his Lad ys join- 
ture, and his estate woud be sold and lost for ever to his family, 
and they woud send himself back to Geneve wher he might 
starve and dye in prison : all which considerations Dillon did be- 
live woud move the King to approve of his accepting the pro- 
posall made by the Goverment. Mar wrot to the King ane ac- 
count of .this proposall, in a letter dated the 3d of February 
1721 *, to which the King returnd ane answer dated 22d of Fe- 
bruary, wherin having givn his approbation and concent, Mai- 
did conclude the agreement with the Goverment. As this let- 
ter is what Mar insists on as sufficient to justifye him from the 
bad constructions put upon this agreement, it will be proper to 
insert it at large, from the coppy amongst the vouchers of the 
narrative, that it may appear how far it is genuine. 
The Letter is as follows. 

"Yours of the 3d of this month came safe to me, and what it 
contains appears so clear to me that I did not need to take up 
much time to consider on the matter, for since you think you 
cannot upon any account undergo the fatigue of your former post, 
it woud be most unreasonable for me who employed you to ob- 
struct what may so much tend to your interest without preju- 
dicing mine; nay, I go further, which is, that this step you pro- 
pose to make will enable yovt to be of more service to me whom 
you love, ! than you coud be otherwise in the way you are; so 
that all things eonsideredj-i have not en my own account any 



* This- letter is not amongst the vouchers. 
2 A3 



1 80 REGISTER OF LETTERS, 

objection to the matter, and heartily wish you may not be dissap- 
pointed in your expectations, which is all I can say on the sub- 
ject ; for being as thorowlie convinced as I am of your zeall and at- 
tachment for me, I can assure you nothing can make me take any 
umbrage on that head. I have not nor shall not mention this mat- 
ter to any body but John, whom I did conclude you did not de- 
sign to exclude from your secret. I am glad Lady Mar is come 
safe to you : I belive the Queen will scarce be able to write to 
her this post, because of the Carnavall. As for other matters I 
refer to Mr. Dillon, assuring you that nothing can alter my sen- 
timents towards you, and that my confidence of your doing your 
best, on all occasions, to serve me, is certain." 

The narrative proceeds to mention ane other transaction (which 
the Bishop adduces to prove Mars treasonable corrispondence with 
the Goverment) and gives this account of the matter. That in 
May 1722, when the Goverment was hunting for a plot, a gentel- 
man * was sent from England with a letter -f- to Mar from Lord 
Carteret, in name of Tounshend and Walpole, by orders of King 
George, to try if they coud procure any light into the plot they 
apprehended then in hand, from what Mar woud say upon the 
subject. This person so soon as he arrived at Paris wrot to Mar 
desiring he woud meet him privately: Dillon was by chance 
with him when he got that letter, which he shewed to him, and 
he agreed to stay still at his house till he shoud go and return 
from that person, which he did, and then he told him the subject 
of their conversation and shewd him Carterets letter. Mar and 
Dillon consulted togather and thought it a lucky accident, since 
Mar had therby ane opportunity of doing the Kings affairs a 
good service, by leading the Goverment off the true scent and 
therby prevent their furder enquiries; wherupon Mar wrot a 

* Supposed to be Colonel Churchill. 

t This letter is not amongst the vouchers. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 181 

letter* in the terms Dillon and he concerted with that veiw, and 
having shewd it to another of the Kings freinds -j- who approved 
of it, he sent it to the person who brought Carterets letter, to be by 
him delivered to His Lordship. Mar immediatlie gave the King 
and the Duke of Ormond, by 2 letters J, ane account of this affair, 
to which the King returnd ane answer dated 8 June 1722 ; and 
because this letter is also produced to stop the mouths of those 
who asperse Mar on account of what he did in that affair, it will 
be fit to transcribe it from the coppy amongst the vouchers. 

Follows the letter. 

" I have perused with attention the account you sent me of 
what had lately past twixt you and a certain emissary, and can 
never enuff express to you how intirely satisfyed I am with it 
and sensible of your behaviour on that occasion. I heartily wish 
it may prove of no inconvenience hereafter to yourself, for as 
you have managed the matter, it will I hope turn even of ad- 
vantage to me : my only apprehension is from those lights and 
informations which may have caused this message; but if your 
answer puts them upon another scent, it will prove no small 
service and be a very providentiall accident in the present con- 
juncture." 

Ther is amongst the vouchers the coppy of another letter 
from the King, said to be wrot to one of his doers at Paris 
without mentioning his name, dated 13 August 1722, wherin 
the King justifyes and approves of Mars conduct, and regrates 
the aspersions cast on him about the plot, and is much concernd 
on account of the divisions amongst the loyall partie his freinds, 
fomented and encouraged by their common enimys, as the 
surest method to undoe them. 



* This letter is not amongst the vouchers. 

t Supposed to be Lord Lawnsdon. 

| These letters are not amongst the vouchers. 



1 82 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

The narrative mentions that the Bishop does also charge 
Mar with having advised the King to resign his right to the 
crown, for a pension. This accusation is said to be so ridico- 
lous, that it requires no other answer than transcribing two let- 
ters* writ from Geneve by Mar to the King and Dillon, on 
which the Bishop founds his alledgence. Both these letters are 
dated the 20 of January 1720. In that to the King he repre- 
sents that if application was made to the Courts of Spain and 
France, tis probable they might, at the treatie of Cambray, pro- 
cure a sum of mony to be paid yearlie by England for his be- 
hoof, which woud help him in his straits and might be so con- 
trived as to carry allongst with it no reflection on his honour nor 
do any prejudice to his interest, by the interposition of other 
princes who woud not refuse their names to cover His Majesties 
being concerned in it. The letter to Dillon is in the same straiu, 
with this addition, that because it woud take some space to have 
the Kings opinion and approbation, and that time IB likewise 
precious, it woud be proper that he (Dillon) shoud mention this 
proposall to the Regent. The narrative mentions another charge 
against Mar ; That his scheme, which he laid before the Regent, 
was with a design to ruin the King. This scheme -f- is by the 
narrative said to have been calculated to remove the objections 
which France might have to the Kings restoration, particularly 
that as England woud be more powrfull under a legal setled go- 
verment than under the present distracted condition, whilst at 
the same time the English antipathy and jealousie of the French 
woud be continued and the King under a necessity of gratifying 
his people therin, woud therby be a more formidable obstruction 
to the powr and designs of France. For removing of this ob- 

* These 2 letters are amongst the vouchers. 

+ A coppy of this scheme and Mars letter with it to the Regent is amongst 
the vouchers. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 183 

jection it was proposed, that after the Kings restoration his 2 
kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland shoud be restored to their an- 
tient state of independance on England, and be protected in their 
trade, and therby enabled and inclined to support the King in 
such a manner as he d be under no necessity of entering into 
measures, contrary to his inclinations, to gratifye the caprices 
and allay the factions of his English subjects. And it was also 
proposed that certain number of French forces shoud remain, 
after the King was restored, in Britain, till he had modelld and 
established the Goverment on this footing, and that 5000 Scots 
and as many Irish troops shoud be lent to the French King and 
by him keept in pay for a certain number of years. The narra- 
tive affirms that this scheme was founded orv certain articles 
which the King had granted in favours of Scotland (and now 
lodged in the hands of a certain community at Paris by the 
King's express Commands) and woud no doubt have granted the 
like in favours of Ireland had application been made to him for 
that purpose. Altho what was proposed by this scheme tended 
to facilitate the King's restoration and render his administration 
easie when restored, by doing justice to 2 of his kingdoms and at 
the same time making no encroachment on the rights and liber- 
tys of the 3d, yet was it absolutely necessary that the moving of 
this scheme shoud be with great address and secresie, least it come 
to the knowlege of some persons who might make a bad use of 
it; and therfore tho Mar had long ago formed it, he woud make 
no steps therin during the life of Cardinall du Bois, whom he knew 
to be particularly attatched to the Goverment of Britain : but that 
obstacle being removed he thought it proper to lay it before the 
Regent, who he has reason to belive received it with approba- 
tion, seing he thought fit to seall it up, with ane address to the 
Duke of Burbon, and recommended it to his care, so that it is 
probable had the Regent lived, or the secret not been propaled, 
it might have been executed at a proper season. But least this 



184; REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

scheme shoud have hapned to be discovered, to prevent the Kings 
being blamed by those who for particular reasons woud be dis- 
pleased at it, he laid it before the Regent without the Kings 
knowledge, but immedially therafter acquainted him therof and 
sent him a copy of it, and at the same time represented how ab- 
solutely necessary it was to keep the scheme a secret*; neverthe- 
less Mr. Hay thought fit to send the Bishop of Rochester a copy 
of it; and he again is so enraged at any proposall tending to the 
advantage and interest of Scotland, that he cannot forbear venting 
his malice against the author, and drawing a number of false 
conclusions from the nature and tendencie of it. 

The remaining part of the narrative contains many assu- 
rances of Mars fidelity to the King, and to shew how improbable 
it is, that he should ever engage himself in any measures con- 
trary to His Majesties interest, having for his service done and 
suffered as much as any of his subjects, and having no prospect 
of any way left him to recover his family, but by and thorow the 
Kings restoration. 



Here it may not be improper to remark that Mars enimys com- 
plaind loudlie against him on account of this scheme. They 
said the article in favours of Scotland and Ireland and the keep- 
ing such a body of French troops in England and such another 



* Whatever secresie was designd, the publick newspapers in January 1724 
mentioned a schemes toeing laid before the Regent, by a certain Lord then at 
Paris : and as it is more than probable that the person who discovered the 
scheme woud not conceall the author, it seems the Goverment of England did 
not resent this obvious breach of the neutrality that was stipulated, seing they 
performed what they had promised, having since the discovery of the scheme, 
under the cover of a sham sale sufferd the estate of Mar to fall to that family 
again. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 185 

body of British troops readie on a call from France, was con- 
trived to irritate the English nation against the King: That it 
was delivered to the Regent under a shew of the Kings service, 
that coming from a person attachd to him, it might appear with 
more credit and more effectually answer what was designd by it; 
and that it was not to be doubted but the Regent woud discover 
the design (nay perhaps was on the plot) to his dear ally King 
George. Others again affirmed that the foundation of the scheme 
was very right laid, it being very certain that the necessity the 
King woud probably be under of gratifying his people by siding 
against France, was alwayes esteemd the cheif reason why Lewis 
1 4 chose rather to keep Britain divided than, by restoring the 
royall family, establish peace and harmony and therby put Bri- 
tain in a better capacity to thwart his designs; and the selling 
the King on such a sure bottom as he needed not depend on and 
submit to the humours of his Parliaments, was one way to remove 
these apprehensions from the French Ministry. And it is as evi- 
dent that a King of England has no such effectuall method to 
curb and overawe his people of that kingdom, than by playing 
his subjects of Scotland against them, and in order therto to che- 
rish and enable that nation to support him. But on what veiw 
the Irish were to be on the same footing does not appear, the con- 
sequences of the Irish nation's being independent of England, 
being of a quite different nature from those of Scotland ; as Ire- 
land is a seperate island and a great part of it the propertie of 
English subjects. With what intention Mar subjoind these arti- 
cles relating to the bodys of French, Scots and Irish troops (which 
seem to be a dangerous expedient) or even presented the scheme 
in generall to the Regent, will be more or less favourably re- 
ceived, according to the good or bad opinion formed of his right 
intentions to the King and his service: but be that as it will, 
Lord Invernesses indulging his private malice so far against Mar, 
as to send a coppy of this scheme to the Bishop of Rochester, was 

VOL. II. 2 B 



186 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

most imprudent, as it made the scheme more publick and the 
w liisper of its being offerd to the Regent certain, and affoorded 
a liandle for the Kings enimys to slirr up the English against 
him and his cause. It is scarcely credible that Stairs, at that 
time the British ambassador at the court of France, woud ven- 
ture to advance a sum of mony to one in Mars circumstances 
without praeviouslie acquainting and having the allowance of his 
master, and if that be the case, tis probable ther was a secret 
corrispondence twixt Mar and Stairs, for tis not to be imagined 
the British Goverrnent woud confer gifts on Mar unless he under- 
took some service or other. With whatever intention Mar ac- 
cepted of the pension in leiw of his estate, till it was restored to 
his family (which by the bye was a favour which the Goverment 
offerd of themselves to him, being more than is pretended he de- 
manded, and which is not commonly practiced) yet it woud ap- 
pear the Goverment expected some returns, otherwise they woud 
not have applyd to him for a discovery of the designs they con* 
ceived were then in agitation. 

Letter to the King. 

K July 25, 1*725. 

" Sir, When I received yours of the 23d of June I coud not 
possibly write fully and directlie in answer to it in mine of the 
13th instant. The ship saild nixt day, and I had not time to 
meet and talk with your freinds on the important subject con- 
taind in it; but I went immediatlie to Edinburgh, wher I found 
no more of your trustees, except Duke of Hamilton and Earl of 
Kincardine, that I inclined to be free with, because of your di- 
rections in relation to Mar. To these two I shewd your letter, 
and having likewise talked with 'some persons of good sense 
and great integrity (without particularly communicating to them 
what was containd in yours) I thought it my duty to lay their sen- 
timents before you. 

" They are humblie of opinion that if the Highlanders pretend 

.H .JO/ 



REGISTER OP LETTERS* 1 87 

to stand it out against the Goverment, it will be a rash and fatall 
attempt: That it is not to be imagined they can by resistance get 
better terms, unless they were able to defeat the Goverment, and 
if they faild therin, the utter extirpation of their race woud be 
the certain consequence; and therfore your freinds here are una- 
nimouslie of opinion that as the Highlanders are a body of men of 
such valuable consideration both to your interest and that of the 
countrie, it is by no means reasonable to hazard them at ane un- 
certainty, for tho they shoud give up their arms (which will not 
be the case) it will be easier to provide them therwith after- 
wards than to repair the loss of their persons when your service 
calls for their assistance: and here give me leave to add that the 
near prospect you have of forreigne assistance (which I take to be 
such as is not sufficient to conquer but to assist and enable your 
freinds in England to make good their intentions to serve you) 
is ane argument rather against than for the Highlanders break- 
ing out singly by themselves. For as I have often observed, both 
from publick transactions and private conversations, that the bulk 
of the English, nay even such of them as are most in your in- 
terest, having a nationall antipathy to the Scots, are in a parti- 
cular manner jealous of their having the honour of being too 
active and instrumentall in your restoration, any measure for 
that end which has its rise from Scotland will not, I fear, be so 
Avell seconded as if undertaken by Englishmen. In the next 
place, tho over a botle or even in their most serious consultations 
they are sensible enuffof their unhappy circumstances and seem 
willing to enter into measures for their deliverance, yet great 
numbers of them are so intoxicated with the love of ease and 
plentie, that theyr backward to enter into action and woud wil- 
lingly cast the brunt of the first attempt on the Scots, and wait 
to declare and take a part, till they see how matters are like to 
go ; and thus betwixt the different veiws of these two set of men, 
the game has been and may again be lost; for which reason it 



188 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

appears absolutely necessary that the English shoud know tliey ve 
no staff to lean on but their own. If they once engage and arc- 
heartily dipt, they know the Scots will soon follow after them, 
and consequently the Scots not opening the scheme is no cause 
of discouragement and shoud not retard the English from doing 
what their duty and interest calls for from them. This doctrine 
is in my opinion (with all deference however to yours) so essen- 
tial to be advanced in the laying down a scheme for your being 
effectually supported in England, that the reverse therof woud, 
Ime affraid, have, as it has had, very dismall effects. 

" But laying aside this way of reasoning, your freinds are of 
opinion, that as the Highlanders are situated and exposed to the 
hatred of the Goverment, it is by no means adviseable to hazard 
them on the prospect you have and mention of speedie assistance 
from forreign Powers: These undertakings are lyable to so many 
accidents, that the best formd designs may prove abortive, in 
which case any prsevious declaration for you, woud terminate in 
the utter ruin of your freinds and party: If such forreign Powers 
as can and are willing to aid you are at pains to enquire into the 
true state of affairs and charactars of persons, they cannot doubt 
of your Scots subjects readiness to declare for you whenever a pro- 
bable attempt is made, which will contribute as much to the de- 
sired issue of it, as if they shoud begin sooner, whilst at the same 
time it secures your interest in the countrie in case of unluckie 
interveening accidents and dissappointments. 

" As these are the sentiments of your freinds here (which they 
lay before you with all submission) so likewise do they seem to 
be the opinions and resolutions of the Highlanders themselves 
both at home and abroad. That the first are so inclined and re- 
solved I know certainly, and I have reason to belive the same of 
the others, for I saw lately a letter from one of the clans, now at 
Paris, giving ane account of severall conferences they had with 
the Bishop of Rochester, and of their being so much against re- 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 189 

sisting the Govermentat this juncture that they refused to obey 
his directions to come over and take up arms, tho supported by 
a signd manuall from you to that effect. 

" These then being the sentiments of your freinds here and 
the intentions of the Highlanders, Kincardine and I turnd our 
thoughts, how wee coud best answer your designs and veiws in 
this situation of affairs ; and having been informed that a person 
of distinction was just come in cog to Edinburgh, sent by the 
Highland cheiftans to get intelligence and advice, Kincardine 
went to him; and being informd that the Highlanders were de- 
termined to submitt in so far as to pretend a great readiness to 
comply and give up part of their arms (but withall to keep and 
secure the best and even so many as woud be almost sufficient 
when a fair occasion offered to use them) Kincardine told him 
he woud give no contrary advice, but since he had good reason 
to belive, that ane attempt for restoring of you by forreign assist- 
ance was designd and that so speedily that he did not know how 
soon he might hear of it, he coud not but think it expedient that 
they shoud spin the time out as long as possible, to see if that re- 
leife woud come; and seing the method prescribed by the dissarm- 
ing act woud at least take up 4 or 5 weeks before the forms 
theirin directed coud be executed, he wishd theyd delay giving 
up their arms to the very last. The gentleman was in a rapture 
at this suggestion, took the hint, assuring the rule shoud be ex- 
actlie followd, and went away earlie next morning to acquaint 
his freinds and constituents of the measure. Wee took the same 
method to influence the Mkenzies, who act as a body by them^ 
selves, so that Ime pritty possitive the surrendry, such as is de- 
signd it shoud be, will be putt off for some time ; and if the veiws 
you have be executed in the time your letter insinuates, all things 
here, I hope, will be as youd wish them, with respect to the High- 
landers; but I cant say so much for other parts of the country, 
for tho people of all ranks are extremely enraged and that this 



190 BEGISTER OF LETTERS. 

certainly is as proper a season as ever was to make ane attempt 
for you, yet many inconveniencies will arise that cannot suddenlie 
be evited. Ther are no directions givn by you nor no person 
cloathd with authority to give orders how to act and behave, 
no concert amongst your freinds, no designs laid down, no pre- 
parations made; and as wee know not how, wher, or when this 
attempt, which is perfectlie new to us, is to be made, tis not pos- 
sible to lay down the necessary and proper praevious measures 
suddenlie; and altho these and the like obstacles might be ore-' 
come in a competent time, yet that, Ime affraid, will be very 
much obstructed by the Goverments seizing on such of your 
freinds as are most capable to advance your service at such a 
juncture; for how theyl evite this confinement is more than I can 
see thorow, the Goverments troops being numerous and betwixt 
them and the Highlands, so that I can propose no shelter for them 
but in the western shires, wliich will at the same time be very 
uncertain, as their are in all shires some senseless knavish jus- 
tices of the peace, whol too probably committ them; and if these 
be under restraint it will do irreparable prejudice to the cause, 
as by and thorow them, many projects might be concerted and 
executed, that without them, Ime affraid, will be intirely om- 
initted, to the very great loss of both your and the countries ser- 
vice. 

" Since my last I have for the first time seen Major Walkinshaw, 
and his explanation of a paragraph in your last wherin his name 
is mentiond, serves for ane answer to what I wrot to you about a 
certain sum of mony, and Ime glad to know by him that Dundas 
was relived. He tells me that Mars unwarrantable jealousie of 
him excited his malice so far, that besides the letter which he 
wrot to Balmerinoch, he and his adherents writ several 1 other let- 
ters, by the common post, without any cypher, wherin mention 
was made of the Majors name and that he was sent by the Bishop 
of Rochester to play his game for him: As this, without a stretch, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS'. 1 9 1 

may bear the construction of being intended to discover him, the 
prospect of succeeding might perhaps have givn rise to the story 
you heard of his being actually seized. [The account of some 
other particulars than formerlie in another letter mentiond of the 
Glasgow riot, being next insert, I ommitt that part of this letter, 
because the whole affair is alreadie narrated.] 

" By improving these and the like occurrencies wee hope to 
advance your interest, and for that end Kincardine and I stay 
close in Edinburgh, to watch all opportunitys, and tis not a 
small satisfaction to see severall, who were shy enuff to be so 
much as seen with us formerlie, converse now very freelie and 
ask our advices, of which wee make all the advantage wee can : 
at the same time Aveer obliged to be very cautious, the Goverment 
suspecting our designs and keeping a strict eye over us. 

"Since I began some 2 or 3 dayes ago to transcribe this 
into cypher, I hear that Wade goes north on Monday, and 
Ime very certain he does not think of calling in the arms for 5 or 
6 weeks; and as he was much against the Advocats manner of 
proceeding at Glasgow, Ime assured hed fain have matters go 
smoothlie in the Highlands; whither this proceeds from his na- 
turall disposition (for he's a well enuff temperd man) or that hes 
so instructed I cant tell. 

" I have heard lately from Mr. Gordon of Glenbucket (who 
has been very active in traversing the Highlands and putting 
them on right measures as to the concealment of their best arms) 
in answer to a letter I wrot to him (as I told you before) and he 
tells me that Captain Frazer will be a most acceptable person to 
him and all his Highland freinds ; and therfore the Duke of Ha- 
milton and the Earls of Wigtoun, Panmure, Kincardine, Eglin- 
ton and Lord Balmerinoch do all concurr in recommending Fra- 
zer as the most proper person in this countrie to receive and ex- 
ecute your orders, whilst at the same time Corsar continues to 
take care of your letters to and fro. 



102 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

" My son being lately in the north saw Earl of Findlater, who 
told him it consisted with his knowledge that this last spring ap- 
plication was made for a pardon to Mar and that he belived it 
woud be obtaind nixt winter. 

" I did not faill timouslie to acquaint you of Harry Stratons 
death, but it seems my letter was not come to hand at writing of 
your last, and wee long to have your sentiments on what I wrot 
on that subject. I shoud make ane appology for so tedious a letter, 
but as I imagined youd be curious to have a full account of what 
past here at this juncture, Ime hopefull youl excuse me and be so 
good as to belive I cannot be any thing more than I am Yours." 

Abstract of a Letter from one of the Highland cheiftans at Paris, to 
Mr. John M c cleod advocat dated the end of June 1725. 

Upon the motions being made in the House of Commons to 
bring in a bill for dissarming the Highlanders, a gentleman was 
sent to London by Lord Seaforth and the other clans, to know 
the result of that motion, who, on the bills passing into a law, 
returnd back to Paris, and having acquainted them of what had 
been done, they immediatly dispatchd ane account therof to 
the King, desiring immediate directions if or not they were to 
comply with the new law. The King returnd for answer that they 
were to comply rather than ruin their followers ; but as this answer 
came under the Bishop of Rochester cover, he thought fit to keep 
up the letter. However they were otherwise apprized of theKing's 
sentiments, because a freind of theirs (Allan Cameron) at Rome 
had signifyed the same to them by a missive which came not 
within the Bishops clutches. The Bishop in the interim had sent 
pff ane express to the King, the return to which orderd these 
gentlemen to arms : on the arrivall of this 2d letter, the Bishop 
was pleased to call them togather at Paris and did communicate 
the contents therof to them. They finding this last letter dif- 
ferrd so much from the account their freind at Rome had givn 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 1 93 

them of the Kings sentiments containd in his first letter keept up 
by the Bishop, desired to see that first letter, directed to them, 
which being- again and again pressd, was possitively refused, on 
which they reasond fully on the obvious bad consequences which 
woud probably attend so rash a step. The Bishop still insisting 
upon their complying, they desired to know what assistance they 
were to have of men mony and arms towards ther being sup- 
ported, to which they got no other answer than that they woud 
be assisted by a certain forreign Powr, whose name he did not 
find himself at libertie to discover. After which the gentlemen 
retired, being nowayes of the Bishops sentiments, trusting more 
to the first letter from the .King, of which their freind had trans- 
mitted to them the substance, than to this 2d letter, which the 
Bishops conduct with respect to the first inclined them to belive 
was by him impetrate from the King; nor did these gentlemen 
rest here, for they immediatly dispachd to General Gordon, the 
same person they had imployd at London, who hearing the par- 
ticulars of the conversation with the Bishop, approved of what 
had been done on the part of the clans. This transaction was 
about the midle of May. 

Here I may remark that the account I had of this affair, from 
Cameron himself, jumpd pritty near with this letter, except as 
to that part wher the Bishop refused to tell them how they were 
to be supported. For, as Cameron told me, when they insisted 
to know how and from whence they were to be supported, the 
Bishop replyd, if they woud once resolve to go to Scotland and 
rise in arms, then bed open all to them, but if they refused, twas 
needless to discover the Kings correspondence and intrigues. 

Letter to the King. 

"2d September 1725. 

" Sir, The ship in which this is to go being to saill to mor- 
row morning, I am obliged to sit up all night that I may get it 
readie in time, so I hope youl excuse what errors I may committ 

VOL. u. 2 c 



194 REGISTER OF UiTTEIlS. 

in transcribing it into cyphers, so hastily, and that I cannot write 
so fully as I woud, had I more time. 

" Such of your freinds as knew of the contents of yours of 
the 23d of June have been ever since under the utmost impa- 
tience, and are extremly vexed and surprised that they have 
heard no furder from you, and that nothing of what was insi- 
nuated to be soon expected, nay not so much as the arrivall of 
these Highland cheiftans that were on your side of the water, 
hath hapned : had your measures succeeded, never was this 
countrie in such a disposition. The Duke of Hamilton came 
yesterday from the west, and tells me he had messages sent him 
from the magistrates of Glasgow and from leading people in 
other parts of the west, that they were willing to venture all for 
you and woud follow him ; and indeed the people in all parts are 
thus disposed, so that with a small forrcign force, or even with- 
out it, your bussiness coud be effectually done here in a short time, 
if so be you coud bring such forreign assistance to England as 
coud make a stand, till your freinds in that country were therby 
encouraged and enabled to get togather. The greatest loss here 
is the want of persons of figure and capacity to manage your 
affairs : some mind nothing but diversions, and others are un- 
active and lazy, so that these 8 or 9 months by past (during 
which severall oppertunitys to be improvd for your service have 
cast up) the whole burthen has layn on Kincardine and myself, 
which has tyed us down to almost a close residence in Edin- 
burgh. I can answer for both our zeall and readiness to serve 
you, but the concurrance of persons of more weight and capacity 
is necessary, and the want therof does much harm. 

" If my former letters are come safe to your hands, youl have 
pritty full accounts of all that has past here, the sequell wherof 
youl find in mine to Inverness, which I write not in cypher, as 
being ane account of what is publickly current here, the truth 
wherof you may relye upon. No doubt the Goverment will be 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 195 

at pains to magnifye and spread abroad their success in dissarm- 
ing the Highlanders, but depend out tis all a jest ; for few or no 
swords or pistols are or will be surrendred, and only such of their 
firelocks as are of no value, so that a small recruit of good arms 
will put them in a better state than before. I mention this so ex- 
presslie that you may contradict reports to the contrary, least 
they discourage those from whom you expect forreign aid. I now 
plainlie see that this Highland expedition (what ever might be 
at first pretended or intended) is now at the bottom a money 
job ; the Generall has got a great sum of mony to pass thorow 
his hands for it, and his scheme is to be mighty civill to the High- 
landers and under the collour of his having perswaded them to 
give up their arms (which the trash they give him will enable 
him to represent) to make himself pass as ane usefull man and 
fit to be continued in Scotland with a good salary. But at the 
same time I know likewise their are some of the Goverment 
heartily vexed that the Highlanders have made no opposition, 
hoping, if they had, that in this time of tranquillity they might 
have extirpated them, wheras, as matters have been managed, 
they will still remain and be in a capacity to serve you when a 
fair occasion offers. Give me leave to mention to you how far it 
woud be proper that their was a corrispondence establishd twixt 
your trustees here and your freinds in France, in case of emer- 
gencies that may happen. If you think proper, youd be pleased 
to appoint the 2 persons that are to be entrusted with it and 
how far it is to extend. 

" Wee long to have your directions on the contents of sevrall 
letters I have wrot to you since Captain Stratons death and with 
respect to the packet I sent you about Mar. 

" Daniell Murdochson (Seaforths servant) is come to Edin- 
burgh in his way to France. He's been in quest of me, and I of 
him, these 2 dayes and mist each other, but in a day or 2 
he's to be at my countrie house, when I'le get time to talk full 



196 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

with him. In the mean time I know from one that saw him, 
that he has takn up and secured all the arms of value in Sea- 
forths estate, which he thought better than to trust them to the 
care and prudence of the severall owners ; and the other cheif- 
tans, I hear, have done the same. Your freinds think that when 
you have ane attempt in veiw it woud be much for your service 
that youd let them timouslie know with what number of men it 
it is to be made and at-what place, that they may know how to 
steer. I am in the most respectfull dutifull manner Yours." 

Letter to Earl of Inverness. 

" 2d September 1725. 

" By yours of the to John Corsar I perceive the King 

has acquainted you of the reason why I made no return to the 
2 letters I had the honour to receive from you ; and having now 
a direction how to write I take the first oppurtunity to assure 
you of my utmost respect. Notwithstanding all that has Implied 
since I last drank a botle with you, I shall never give over hopes of 
being once again merry with you ; and towards bringing matters 
to such a posture shall be as earnestly my endeavour as it is my 
sincere wish. Ime so straitned in time I cannot write so fully as 
I ought and woud. 

" By my former letters to the King youl find that Stratons pa- 
pers were very rashlie destroyd, by which thers ane entire stop 
put to all corrispondence thorow his canall at home and abroad, 
and it will be pritty difficult and take some time to reestablish 
it : for want of these, Corsar cant write fully to you, nay he 
coud not understand yours, but as I guessd, by remembering 
some of the names in Stratons cypher, however wee made a shift 
to know your meaning by your mumping. 

" Youl be curious, I suppose, to know what is adoing in this 
country ; About 20 of the Glasgow rioters were apprehended 
and brought to Edinburgh and are soon to be tryd for felony 
on a new law past within these few years, the penaltie wherof is 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 197 

the loss of life goods and chattells. If the jury consist of those 
weer told the justiciary clerk hath prickd out, their must be very 
clear proofs to condemn them. [I ommitt what followd nixt, 
being much the same with the account I have given elsevvher of 
the brewars of Edinburgh.] 

" On the 12 of August their came to Inverness about 150 gen- 
telmen of the M c kinzies headed by the Lord Tarbat, Sir Colin 
M c kinzie of Coul and Sir Kenneth M c kenzie of Cromartie. This 
last spoke in name of the rest to the Generall, the purport wlierof 
was, that they were come as representing and in name of the vas- 
sals and tennants of Seaforth ; that these woud not come in them- 
selves untill they knew how theyd be received ; that their rents 
had for sevrall years been uplifted by my Lords servant Daniell 
Murdochson and they were not able to pay them overagain, but 
if they were discharged therof, they for the future woud pay 
their rents to the Goverment, deliver up their arms and live 
peaceably. The Generall told them he took their visit very kindly 
and desired them to acquaint ther freinds, what they demanded 
shoud be granted, and if they performed as they promised he 
woud endeavour, and he had reason to hope not without success, 
that when nixt session of Parliament did meet, a pardon shoud 
be granted to Seaforth and all his freinds. Then they eat and 
drank heartily for 2 or 3 dayes ; after which the Generall, at- 
tended by these gentlemen and a small body of dragoons, went 
to Castlebran to receive the M c kenzies arms, At the same time 
came the Lairds of Glengary and Keppoch and delegates from 
the M c donalds of Sky and the M c kintoches, who made the like 
submission. So soon as the M c kenzies arms are received, the 
Generall is to break up his camp at Inverness and with a small 
body of troops to go to Killy whyman to receive the arms of the 
M c donalds of Glengary and Keppoch and the Camerons, from 
thence to Inverlochy to receive the arms of the M c donalds of 



193 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Sky and Glencoe and the Stuarts of Appin : and the castle of 
Inverness is to be repaird and further fortifyed. 

" To this I have only to add that the Squadrone are intirely at 
under and seem to be in no good humour. I am Yours." 

Letter from Lord Inverness.* 

" August 4, 17-25. 

" Sir, The King wrot to you the 23d of June ; he had not 
then received yours of the 8 and 24 of May, tho he had ane ac- 
count another way of Captain Stratons death, and in a letter I 
wot to Mr. Corsar 3 weeks ago, I desired him to acknowlege 
the receipt of that of the 8 of May ; I am now to answer yours 
of the 24 ; and I shall repeat to you again that notwithstanding 
what Earl of Kinnoill might have shown as coppies of the 
Kings letters to him, what the King said to you with relation 
either to his own or my correspondence with that person is cer- 
tainly fact, and what he may have pretended must either have 
been counterfeited or come from some other person who might 
write in the Kings name without his authority. 

" I need say nothing of Major Walkinshaws journey, who had 
the Kings leave to go over and setle some private affairs with 
Lord Eglinton, as that Lord informed you. I was in some pain 
about him for a long while, for it was industriouslie reported at 
Paris that he was takn up, and Mar made a great deall of noise 
about his journey, which I was indeed affraid might occasion his 
being seized ; and I am sorry Mar and his freinds shoud be seek- 
ing reasons of complaint against others, at the same time that 
facts that can be provn against him, are rather conceald and not 
made publick : I am very much of Lord Duns opinion that the 
less noise is made about Mar the better; I alwayes thought so, but 
at the same time my motives for thinking so may be different from 
his, tho he woud think as I do were his information as good. 

* Received 8 September 1725. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 199 

" The King finds now that the Highlanders are resolved to 
make no resistance, and accordingly has withdrawn the orders 
for assisting them, on the supposition that they were not to de- 
liver up their arms quicklie, and has thought fit to send Allan 
Cameron over to inform them of his readiness to do all in his 
power to sustain them, and with a veiw likewayes of bringing 
him back particular accounts of the situation of that country. 

" The King orderd me, in consequence of what had formerlie 
been wrot by you in relation to Corsar, to write to him and setle 
the correspondence that way, which I accordingly did. Now that 
you mention Captain Frazer (of whom the King has a very good 
opinion) and that the trustees seem to think him the properest 
person for carrying on that business, the King is resolved to 
make no possitive answer to that part of your letter, till you write 
further on the subject, as you promise to do after you have con- 
sulted with the Duke of Hamilton, Glenbucket and others who 
were not within your reach. The destroying of Stratons cypher 
will creat some uneasiness in corrispondence for some time, but 
as soon as the King is delermined by whose hands that part of 
his corrispondence shoud go, that loss in a litle time can be made 
up. All the Family are in perfect good health. I am Yours." 

Letter* from the King. 

" 1st September 1725. 

" Yours of the 13 July came safe to me some dayes ago, and 
the accounts you give me of the present situation of Scotland 
were the more agreeable, that I am sensible you are not capable 
of flattering or exaggeration on such heads. This situation will 
make me the more intent and ardent in my solicitations for for- 
reign assistance : I cannot, tis true, hope for any this year, but 
it is highlie probable matters may be so prepared in the winter, 
that the ensuing year may not pass in inaction, and if that be the 

* Received 6 October. 



200 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

case, I hope that event will find Scotland in the most favourable 
posture to profile by it. By the return of Cameron, whom I 
have lately sent to the Highlands, I shall have authentick and 
sure accounts from that part of the country, and I wish you woud 
speak to the Duke of Hamilton and those worthy persons you 
name in the beginning of your letter and also some others of 
my principall freinds, to know their opinions and advice as to 
proper steps to be takn both by them and me in relation to Scot- 
land, and particularly as to the choise of a general!. I woud not 
liave you think from hence that ane expedition is immediatly to 
be undertaken, but the situation of Europe is such as that such a 
resolution may be takn on a sudden and when I do not expect 
it, and thcrfore it is prudent to be prepared for it. 

" I have perused the abstract of the narrative dcsignd for Mars 
justification and received it from those that sent it as a fresh in- 
stance of their zeall and attachment to me. I shoud be glad to 
see a full copy of it and of the vouchers which accompanyed it, 
tho the remark made on the margine of the last page shews me, 
that as I have endeavoured to spare Mar hitherto as much as my 
service woud allow, so it is not like to require me to mention him 
any more; I am perswaded in a very litle time I shall not have a 
sincere well-wisher whose eyes will not be opened in that respect, 
or who will have any further dealings with him or any of his 
adherents. The 'accounts Mar formerlie sent with relation to the 
mony affair you mention were so imperfect, that I cannot satisfye 
you on that head, but am heartily sory any body shoud suffer by 
mismanagement in that particular, and see but too well the dis- 
couragement that must produce in welwishers to their good will 
hereafter in such matters : but the truth is, as matters have stood 
of late years, I was not master of my own affairs in France, nor 
coud not be it, by the mismanagement of those employd by me: 
I thank God the case is quite altered now, and those entrusted 
in my affairs have no other veiws but the common good ; and it 



REGISTER OF BETTERS. 

has been no small satisfaction to me to remark in the Bishop of 
Rochester a particular affection for your countrie, which, as oc- 
casions may hereafter offer, I am perswaded he will alwayes con- 
tinue to shew ; and as for Inverness, you know alreadie my good 
opinion of him, which he has never diminished since our first ac- 
quaintance. I have givn him the abstract in which hes so much 
mentioned, but I belive he will not think it worth his while to 
entertain you long upon it. 

" I shall conclude this with informing you of the good health 
of my family and that in some dayes I shall declare James Mur- 
ray, in creating him a Scots Earl, governour to my son the prince, 
who if he follow his instructions and my example will ever look 
on my antient kingdom with the greatest affection and tender- 
ness. Let me hear often from you and be assured of my constant 
kindness." 

Letter* from Lord Inverness. 

"8th September 1725. 

" Sir, The King did me the honour to communicate to me 
your letter of the 13 July, and at the same time put into my 
hands a paper transmitted to him at the desire of some of his 
freinds with you, I do suppose with a veiw of my making some 
reply to it in as far as it might regard myself or some circum- 
stances in the Kings affairs wher I have hapned to be concernd 
of late : but as the King is positively resolved to say nothing 
that can look like ane accusation against the author of the above 
mentiond paper, and that I happen therby to be tyed up, I shall 
satisfye my self with informing you, in a very few words, of some 
particulars which are necessary for making you and others un- 
derstand the true sense in which the paper calld A narrative for 
Mars justification, ought to be read: and to make this letter 
shorter I must not tye myself to mention the particulars of the 

* Received 6 October 1725. 
VOL. II. 2 D 



202 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

abstract in the same order Mar has put them ; so I shall begin 
with informing you, that I alwayes reckond myself obligd to 
Mar for what ever favour he shewd me whilst he was in the 
Kings service, but that as I pretended to no dependance but 
upon the King alone, I alwayes reserved to my self the priviledge 
of judging and even contradicting Mars opinion in some parti- 
culars, wher my judgement led me to do it. I belive Mar knew 
me too well not to communicate to me what he thought I might 
construct against the Kings interest as disadvantagious to it or 
dishonourable to himself, but as late as it was possible. I look 
upon Mars never mentioning to me the subject of the letter he 
wrot to the King 3d February 1721, of which Ime not allowd to 
bend you a coppy, to be ane instance of this, tho I cant belive 
that matter was new to him sometime before ; but since' he has 
sent you a copy of the Kings answer to said letter, which is com- 
prehended in the abstract of the narrative and mentiond ther to 
be dated 22 February 1721, I may safely inform you that Mar 
owns by that letter of 3d February " to have alreadie accepted of 
a pension of 20QO/. from the Goverment over and above 1500J. 
which his Lady and daughter actually then received by way of 
jointure and alimept out of the product of his estate : he men- 
tions that this 3500J. made as much as the value of his whole 
effects, were they put into his hands as he had them formerlie r 
That ther was a necessity for him to make ane immediate answer 
to this offer made him by the Goverment, which he had done r 
but at the same time that he agreed to the proposall, he had told 
the Goverment that he must acquaint the King with it, so that 
it was still in the Kings power to make him do in it what he had 
4 mind." These are the very words of the letter, of which he 
shoud ha.ve sent you a copy at the time he sent the Kings answer. 
After this you wont be surprized that the Kings serious reflec- 
tion shoud have produced such ane answer, when you consider 
how much he was at that time in the confidence of the Kings af- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 203 

fairs, and how many of his freinds at home Mar had then in his 
power. Neither will you wonder that the King, after he knew 
of this pension, shoud be willing to withdraw his confidence 
from Mar by degrees and in such a manner as coud be no wayes 
prejudiciall to his freinds at home. The King had reason at that 
time to belive Mar woud have declined knowing any of His Ma- 
jesties secrets, since by the engagements he lay under to the Go- 
verment he must therby act ane unfair part either to them or 
the King : however this did not happen to be the case, for he 
not only desired it, but by his management of Dillon, who was 
then intirely trusted by the King and by most of his freinds in 
England, he not only knew but directed every thing, notwith- 
standing the repeated diffidence freinds in England shevvd Dillon 
of Mar ; so that by Dillons easie temper, Mar had it in his powr 
to oblige the King to keep in good terms Avith him, to avoid 
giving him any temptation to prejudice his interest essentially. 
This was the situation of the Kings affairs for severall years and 
a melancholly one it was. During that time I had the honour 
to be employd in many things by the King, but was obliged to 
a cautious management, so that Mar might not discover from me 
the Kings having any reserve with him, till such time as His Ma- 
jestic coud lay him aside without prejudice to his freinds, which 
lie never had in his powr to do till the Bishop of Rochester came 
over, when the King sent me in 1723 to France and Holland, 
to execute some particular commissions and at the same time to 
know from that Bishop the true situation of matters in England, 
and when it appeard, as well from many letters to the same 
purpose, that the most thinking people of the Kings freinds be- 
lived his affairs woud not succeed, while Mar had it allwayes in 
his powr to ruin the particular persons engaged in his cause, by 
making projects and engaging them in it or by discovering any 
that shoud be made, in as far as he thought convenient, for the 
procuring of the continuance of his pension, which few people 

2D2 



204 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

will belive the Goverment gave him for nothing. From this 
journey that I made and from the conduct I was obliged to keep 
with Mar, you will easily observe that what he alcdges of my 
having lost the Kings good opinion or any way falln under his 
displeasure was false, whatever I was obliged to make Mar be- 
live by my answers to his letters, when he pressd as much as pos- 
sible my leaving the King, founding his reasons upon 50 insig- 
nificant stories contrived at Paris, for which he never coud give 
me any good authority, tho the knowledge I had of his private 
circumstances might have prompted him to wish my leaving 
Rome at that time. But when I tell you I never received any 
letters from Mar, tho they were conveyd to me in a private way, 
nor never writ any to him but what were communicated to the 
King, I need say no more to you on this article. I shall only add 
here that my conduct towards Mar whilst I was at Paris, was so 
far from dissembling with him, that I then advised him to yeild 
to the speal that was against him, by removing himself from Paris 
and writing a submissive letter to the King, informing of it and 
saying it was not for his interest that he shoud be trusted with 
any of his secrets whilst so many of his freinds mistrusted him, 
but that shoud not hinder him from acting a staunch part in his 
cause when ever ther was any occasion for action. I spoke of 
Mar personally only to 3 persons at Paris who were his great 
confidents, and was so far from disembling with them, that I 
told them my mind freelie on every particular that concernd Mar, 
without breaking with them, which I did not think it my busi- 
ness to do ; nevertheless when he found I woud not enter blindly 
into his measures, he declared openlie against me. 

" As to what relates to the Bishop of Rochester in the narrative 
I ought to allow him to answer it himself; he was well ac- 
quainted with Mars charactar when he came out of England, 
and was fully satisfyed, as many others are, that without Mars 
offices he coud not have been sent out of England as he was : 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 205 

you may remember in the appendix 3 letters, which the Gover- 
ment pretended the Bishop wrot by the same post to 3 different 
persons, supposed then to be at Paris; the letters indeed containd 
nothing of consequence, but it was sufficient that it appeard by 
them that they were writ by a person that did not wish well to 
the Goverment. About the time these letters were writ, Colonell 
Churchill was sent over to France with a letter from the Secre- 
tary of State desiring Mars information about the plot then in 
hand. The Colonell told Mar these 3 letters had been inter- 
cepted copyd at the posthouse and forwarded, and according to 
the Colonells information, who had out rid the post, the letters ar- 
rived at Paris : one of them under a cypher name was designd 
for Mar which he received and notwithstanding the Colonells in- 
formation answered it, addressing his letter by the same cypher 
name, with which the 3 letters were signd. In Mars answer the 
Bishops situation at that time, his Ladys death, his illness, his 
going to his country house ten miles from London &c. were so 
nicely described, that the Goverment who intercepted that an- 
swer, agreed that this coud mean no body but the Bishop, and 
therby proved that he was the author of the 3 mentiond letter?, 
which was declared corresponding against the Goverment. 
Mar neither can deny that he wrot such a letter nor that Mr. 
Churchill informd him of the 3 letters being intercepted, so that 
I cannot wonder that the Bishop, on whom the Goverment had 
a particular eye at that time, shoud blame Mar for having a 
share in his banishment, which is all the reflection I shall make 
on this article, however many may be made upon Churchills mis- 
sion at that time. And as to the Bishops shunning to conferr 
with Mar, sometime after the first came to Paris, which the nar- 
rative seems to affirm, I shall only say that the Bishop acquainted 
me at that time, that after the 12 bundles of papers had been sent 
back, that he had sought all opportunitys of conferring freelie 
with Mar, but coud not find occasion of doing it and that Mar 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

shund being obliged to answer any questions the Bishop had to 
put to him. 

" As to Mars confinement at Geneve, it woud be accusing him 
to say that his going there was concerted, tho both the Spanish 
consull at Leghorn and the Spanish minister at Genua ofFerd to 
convey him directlie from either place into Spain without so 
much as touching on the coast of France. Neither shall I pre- 
tend to judge of the reason of Mars accepting of what he calls a 
loan of mony from Earl of Stairs, only it coud not be for want, 
for the King remitted him considerable supplys to Geneve, tho 
he was entertaind there by the toun, where his expence coud be 
but trifling : and as to his being obligd to return to Geneve from 
France (the fear of which he gives in the narrative as a reason 
for his treating with the English Government) Dillon and some 
other officers in France, who ought to understand matters of that 
kind, gave it him as their opinion, that he was no wayes obliged 
to return tho they shoud call for him. 

" Now I am come to say something about a memoriall, of 
which, in the abstract of the narrative it is said a copy is trans- 
mitted amongst the vouchers : which memoriall, tho a copy of it 
was sent to be delivered to the King after it had been presented 
to the Duke of Orleans, yet the King never acknowledged the 
receipt of it. Mar does me justice in saying that I approved of 
certain articles relating to Scotland, tho I did not at the time be- 
live them to be of so great importance as he pretended they were, 
neither were they represented as the foundation of a scheme, 
which, had the King enterd into it, must have put a stop to his 
restoration for ever, without which these articles coud be of no 
use. I disapproved of the memoriall from the beginning, be- 
cause, as I told Mar when I first saw it, that 1 thought the scheme 
impracticable ; that England was not to be conquered with 6000 
foot souldiers or the Kings freinds in England to be led blindly 
into their own ruin, with sevrall other reasons I need not repeat ; 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 207 

and tho Mar pretends that this was contrived for the advantage 
of Scotland, I reallie cannot see what benefite Irelands being 
more powerfull than England woud bring to us, and as I coud 
not perceive at the time that Mar coud have any reason to be- 
live that Orleans was any wayes disposed to act for ihe King, I 
treated the presenting of it by the Kings minister then at Paris 
as a very imprudent act, since I thought ther was a greater like- 
lyhood of Orleans doing a service to his strict ally Hanover by 
discovering it, than of his entering into it : however my caution 
in divulging it was very great, and I thought it of such conse- 
quence that none entrusted by the King shoud at least be the 
first to mention it, that I did not open my lips about it to any 
soul living during my absence from Rome, nor after I returnd, 
till I knew Mar showd some particular articles in it to some peo- 
ple at Paris, informing them that this memoriall, because it was 
for the interest of Scotland, was the reason of his disgrace ; Then 
indeed, when I found the memoriall to be no more a secret, I 
thought it necessary to send a true copy of it, that so were a false 
one handed about, a true copy might be produced : and it does 
not consist with the Kings knowledge that the Duke of Orleans 
seald up the memoriall and recommended it to the Duke of Bour- 
bon, neither does it appear natural!, since Orleans dyed suddenlie, 
left his papers in the greatest confusion, was not in good terms 
with his successor at the time of his death, and coud nowayes 
foresee that he was to succeed him in the Ministry. 

" Now I must do the Bishop of Rochester justice in telling 
youj that tho it is naturall for every man to wish well to his 
countrie, yet I never observed he had any other veiw but the 
Kings restoration : his whole thoughts are bent that way, he 
never made any distinction that I coud see in his dealings for the 
Kings service, which of the 3 kingdoms the persons he dealt with 
were of, and I dare say woud be far from obstructing any honour 
or advantage our countrie might have in bringing about the re- 



208 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

storation or after the Kings restored. As to what the narrative 
mentions about my wife, that is indeed so childish a way of rea- 
soning, that I shant trouble you with any thing on that head, 
only that Mar has seen the falsity of that assertion under the 
Queens own hand. 

" After you read this youl observe that I was more in the 
Kings confidence for many years than Mar was; That I never 
fell under the Kings displeasure in any degree, and consequentlie 
that I coud not want Mars offices in that respect; Tliat my grudge 
(as its calld) did not proceed from trifles; That my professions of 
freindship, when I came to Paris, were such as they ought to 
have been, without dissimulation either as to my opinion of the 
memoriall or Mars own situation ; That Mar coud be in no want 
of mony at Geneve; That Mars accepting the mony from Stairs 
.was not the only reason why the Bishop of Rochester rnentiond 
in his letter a previous or at least a subsequent approbation ; That 
Mar coud be under no apprehension of returning to Geneve, and 
that his dabbling with the Goverment was even of a longer 
standing than in appearance; That he does not mention in the 
narrative the 500L sterling givn as aue aliment to Lady Fanny; 
That he makes his estate to be 3000/., wheras he coud not, con- 
sidering the debt that was on it, receive 1500/. ; That it does not 
appear what Mar did to .bambuzle the Goverment, which was 
the design of his interveiw with Colonel Churcliill ; That the 
scheme presented to Orleans was, without the King's prseviou^ 
knowledge, presented by his first minister; That the King is ig- 
norant of its being seald up by Orleans and recommended to the 
Duke of Bourbon ; and That Mar was the first discover of the 
scheme himself. I have said nothing of that part of the narra- 
tive -wher it -is said that the Bishop of Rochester accuses Mar 
with advising the King to Design his right to the crown for a pen- 
sion, since I cannot call to mind what may have givn occasion 
ito it; nor do I remember the letter or letters that were writ to 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 209 

the King, advising applications being made lo the courts of 
France and Spain for a pension, if I was informed of that par- 
ticular at the time. 

" Its mentioned upon the margine of the abstract of the narra- 
tive, that a schemes being delivered in to Orleans by a certain 
Peer then at Paris was mentiond in the news papers of January 
1 733 * ; if so, the newsmonger coud not mean the memoriall which 
I have already mentiond, which was only presented in September 
that year, according to the information Mar gave of it; but if 
the news paper in January 1724 had mentioned such a memo- 
riall, tliat woud be indeed particular: but however that be, the 
remark in the main is just, since the Goverments information 
must have been very bad, if they did not know of such a memo- 
riall, before ever they gave Mars estate to him or his family. And 
all I shall add further is that it had been infinitely better in every 
respect, that Mar had made use of the advise I gave him and 
had not gone about accusing of those against whom he had no- 
thing essentiall to say and obliging them, by misrepresenting his 
own case, to tell the truth, to prevent which a silent behaviour 
in him was only necessary. I hope youl excuse the confused- 
ness of this letter, which time did not allow me to put in better 
order. I am Yours." 

Letter from Allan Cameron -f-. 

" September 10, 1725. 

" Sir, At my arrivall here I sent express for the bearer in 
order to acquaint you of my business to this countrie, since that, 
with other circumstances make my going your length impracti- 
cable : therfore as you may entirely trust him, I shall expect to 
know by him a particular account how matters are slated in 



* If the originall copy of the abstract sent to the King mentiond 1723, it 
was ane error in the transcribing, for it shoud have been 1724* 
+ Received 4 October 1725. 
VOL. II. 2 E 



210 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

your parts and of your sentiments therof, which I shall commu- 
nicate carefully to those concerned and who employd me. I'le 
wait a return to this, against which time I hope shall finish what 
I have to do here at this time: referring you to the bearer for the 
rest I add only that I am Yours & e ." 

The bearer of this letter was Mr. Drummond of Bahadie 
junior, nephew to Mr. Cameron, with whom I sent the follow- 
ing letter to him. 

" October 5, 1725. 

" Sir, Before I received yours of the 10th of September, I 
knew of your being come, having been told therof by the Bishop 
of Edinburgh about 3 or 4 weeks ago, as I was acquainted of 
your intention and errand by a letter which I got some litle time 
before that from Lord Inverness. I have a very great inclination 
to see you, because thers twentie usefull matters woud fall into a 
conversation, that cannot occur or be so well handled in a letter: 
I imagined wee might meet without any inconveniencies at a 
freinds house of mine about 12 miles to the north of the Cam 
of Mount, but the bearer of yours to me was affraid youd find it 
difficult to reach that place; on the other hand for me to pretend 
to come directlie towards you woud creat some suspicion in our 
cheif rulers and move them perhaps to severer measures than 
they ve yet takn, and having thus reasond with the Kings trus- 
tees here, they were of opinion such a meeting as they earnestly 
enuff desired, coud not be obtaind without danger to you or in- 
conveniencies from other peoples jealousie, and therfore I laid 
aside all thoughts of it. 

" Youl be able to give the King a particular account of the 
state of his affairs in your neighbourhead, and I have sent him of 
late so full and frequent accounts of them here, that I need not 
repeat them to you, and the truth on't is I have nothing of mo- 
ment to add. That he gains ground every day on the affections 
of his people and that their hatred to his enimys daylie encreas- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS* 1 1 

eth is a certain truth, but at th.e same time his freinds have been 
so harrassed and squeezed of late years, that theyr by no means 
in a condition to make so good ane appearance as they once did; 
and as the world goes, tis no easie matter to recruit them in what 
they want. I mention this that more may not be expected from 
this part than can be performed and to show the necessity of se- 
curing ane interest in other parts, both at home and abroad, be- 
fore any thing to purpose can be done. Ther is not any thing; 
so essentially necessary for the King's service as a perfect good 
harmony and close concert amongst his freinds, and tis no small 
misfortune that the reverse has hapned in distant places: In this 
corner tis quite otherwise, which I take to be much owing to the 
prudent conduct of his .trustees whor, at no small pains to keep 
matters right: how his freinds wher you now are stand in this 
particular I cant tell, for you must know wee here are perfect 
strangers to whats a doing there, seing thers no established cor- 
rispondence. I had occasion within these few dayes to talk of 
these matters with your freind and countriemanMr. John M c cleod, 
and he regrated il extremely and proposed that a corrispondence 
shoud be establishd for the future betwixt some proper person of 
credit in the Highlands, to be pitchd on by the principall people 
there and some one of the Kings trustees here, who might com- 
municate to and advise with ther principals as occasions required, 
and lie was pleased to desire 1 woud take it on me: I told him I 
woud decline nothing in my powr that woud be of any service 
to the Kings interest, but it woud be praviouslie known how far 
your nighbours approvd of the measure in generall, and that 
it was also necessary that they were pleasd in the choise of the 
persons both with themselves and here, to be the managers of the 
corrispondence. I perswade my self youl easily see a great many 
good effects woud follow such a corrispondeuce, as it woud tend 
directlie to prevent divisions, various resolutions, and giving cre- 
dite to false intelligence, atid woud promote unanimity in affec- 

2E2 



212 REGISTER OF LETTERS, 

lions and actions. If therfore your neighbours approve of this 
scheme, the setting it on foot before you go off, will, I humblie 
conceive, be no small service to the King; and if theyl, by a pro- 
per person, signify their inclinations to me, I shall acquaint a 
few of the principall trustees therof, who no doubt will appoint 
any of tHeir number your freinds pitch on, to be the manager on 
their side of the corrispondence, and the sooner this is done the 
better. You! acquaint the King of this proposall when you 
have the happiness to see him,, and Ime pritty much assured he'l 
approve of it heartily. 

" In this world thers nothing happens that ought to seem 
strange, else youd be surprised and scarce credit me, when I tell 
you thers a fair probality of a conjunction in measures betwixt 
the Highlanders and the Cameronians: these last are a powrfull 
body, well provided in all necessarys, and in all respects in a ca- 
pacity to do good service: but as theyr a giddy headed humour- 
ous people tis no easie matter to manage them, tho in the main 
they have good intentions and Ime very hopefull will be brought 
to <lo right things: Tis but of late I was let into this secret, and 
1 have not yet so fully adjusted matters as that I have thought 
it necessary to acquaint the King of it, but I hope in a few 
months to surprize him with a peice of agreeable news in that 
particular. 

" I have nothing more to trouble you with at present but to 
desire youd remember me in the kindest manner to all my old 
acquaintances, particularly to Kilsyth, whose health I drank 
tother day with severall of his neighbours in the country. Be 
so kind likewise as to assure the King of my most dutifull and 
sincere respect and regard for him and his. I wish you with all 
my soul well back to the place from whence you came and from 
thence a speedy and agreeable return and end to all your labours, 
being with all imaginable sincerity Your &c. 

" P. S. Weeve a surmise here of a turn of affairs from, whence 



REGISTER OF LETTERS* 213 

you came, that the Bishop of Rochester is out of favour, and 
Jamie Murray and he have had a scolding boot of it, and that 
the former is gone to Rome to be governour to the Prince and is 
created Earl of Strathern. This news was brought by one who 
came very lately from Bulloign, who had it from 'the Scots club 
there ; what truths in it, I cant say, but I thought it not amiss to 
tell you of it." 

Letter to the King. 

" 13 October 1725; 

" Sir, Yours of the 1st of September came safe to me about 
a week ago : All your trustees but Panmure being in the coun- 
trie I do not expect them in toun for 5 or 6 weeks, and till 
then I cannot communicate to the persons you direct, these point* 
on which you demand their opinions, and I have so litle to say 
just now that I shoud not have troubled you with this but that 
perhaps I shall not have the occasion of another ship from Leith 
for some time, and I was affraid you might think I was remiss iu 
executing what you required of me. 

" I shall endeavour to get a full copy of the narrative, but 
Ime aflraid without success, for (as I mentiond formerlie if Ime 
not mistaken) the person to whom it was sent here was bound 
up from giving coppys : and indeed the abstract I made (which 
I can assure you is pritty full and just) was without his know- 
ledge, at least he did not take notice of it, if he suspected that 
was your freinds design. 

" I had a letter and a message by a safe hand last week from 
Allan Cameron; I woud gladly have met and conversed with 
him, but found he coud not come towards me with safety,, and 
I coud not go to the Highlands without giving umbrage to the 
Goverrnent, which at this criticall juncture was to be avoided. 
You! have from him such full and certain accounts of the affairs 
of the Highlands I will not pretend to entertain you on that sub- 
ject, further than that theyve gone smoothlje enuff, as I ven.- 



REGISTER OP LETTERS, 

tured to assure you of in my former letters. I made a proposi- 
tion to Cameron with respect to your service ; how it took witli 
his freinds I cant tell, but I imagine you'l approve of it, when he 
communicates it to you. All things here are pritty quiet, yet 
you may depend upon it the resentment is only conceald till a 
fair occasion casts up, and care will be takn this winter to keep 
the peoples spirits up as much as possible, which is all can be 
done till your negotiations elsewhere take effect. The welfare 
and prosperity of your family is most agreeable news to all your 
freinds and to none more than 

" Yours &c." 

Letter to Lord Inverness : 

" 13 October 1725. 

" Sir, I received yours of the 8th of September, but most of 
our freinds being in the countrie during this season, I have not 
had anc oppertunity of communicating the same to any but Pan- 
mure, with whom I perfectlie agree that whither Mar was innocent 
or guilty in whole or in part, it was his duty and interest to have sat 
silent as the world goes : and as the King and his servants abroad 
have acted the prudent part in endeavouring to make as litle 
noise as possible of such matters and have declined entering upon 
or communicating particulars, I take it to be ane intimation to 
his freinds here to follow the example, except when tis necessary 
to contradict facts propogated to his prejudice. I had a visite 
yesterday from Mr. Alexander Seymour, whos lately come from 
France ; he enterd on the subject and insisted much that the 
Kings freinds here shoud suppress all noise of any difference 
amongst his freinds abroad and particularly the stories about 
Mar; after which he much condemnd the sending a coppy of the 
memorial to the Bishop of Rochester : I told him I wishd as much 
as he this last had not been done, but as for the other, Mar alone 
was to blame, for if any thing more than what was very genera! 1 
came to light, it was owing to his own conduct in being the first 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 215 

aggressor, by a narrative he had sent over. He replyed that was 
a private matter for the satisfaction of his freinds and to justifye 
himself in their opinions. I answered these his freinds had a 
freind they valued far beyond him, and His Lordship knew many 
years ago theyd never put his interest into the ballance with that 
of the other, to whom, for that reason, they thought it ther duty 
to send a full account of the narrative. At this he seemd sur- 
prised and vexed, adding that Mar did not imagine such ane use 
woud have been made of it. I returnd if what it containd was 
true, their was no harm done him, if it was false it was but just 
that the person he leveld at shoud know it. This and much more 
to the same purpose I spoke, because I coud perceive it woud be 
reported to Mar, and I was willing he shoud know peoples sen- 
timents here. 

" David Nairn came here lately from Bullogne and tells that 
he saw severall letters from Paris giving ane account of Jamie 
Murrays journey and errand to Rome, adding that he and the 
Bishop of Rochester had a scolding bout of it and that the latter 
was out of the Kings favour. This last part of the story (after 
having just received the Kings and your letters and considered 
the strain in which that prelate was mentioned) I took on me to 
contradict as being the contrivance of some malicious secret 
enimy to the King. 

" Weeve had a hot tryall in the justiciary court, of the Glasgow 
rioters: the Earl of Hay and Lord Royston pressd with the out- 
most zeall to find the libell relevant to infer the pains of death : 
the other Lords insisted it coud go no further than ane arbitrary 
punishment, and carried it, except wher any person was proven 
guilty of actually pulling doun Campbles house, in which they 
allowd of so many grounds of exculpation, that of the first ten 
that were tryed, one man and one woman were sentenced to 
perpetuall banishment, and the other 8 absolved, and thers no 
doubt but the remaining set to be tryed will come off easier. I 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

scarce think it very good policy in the G overmen t to show their 
-teeth without biting deeper, but the truth out is, I do belive they 
did not expect the Lords of Justiciary woud have dared to be- 
have as they did, and Lord Hay protested against their proceed- 
ings and threatned to lay the matter before the Parliament. His 
Lordship seems to thrist after bloodie proceses and hes like to 
get work enuff, for ther has been a great mob at Linlithgow in 
choosing of the magistrates, wher, as in most places, the spel 
runs high against all inclind to the present Ministry, Even in 
Edenburgh (wher no pains threats and bribes were ommitted) 
the Court magistrates carried it only by the Provosts casting vote. 
tf Mr. Murray by his long silence seems to have forgot most .of 
his old freinds here, however I wish him much joy and good suc- 
cess in his late preferment. I hope youl do me the justice to be- 
live I am very sincerelie Yours." 

Letter * from Allan Cameron. 

" 26 October 1725. 

" Sir, As your accounts and letter by Mr. Drummond, of the 
5th give me a great light in sevrall respects of the state of that 
part of the country, so it came very seasonably concerning the 
.particular you mention in order to setle a solid corrispondence 
and good intelligence betwixt the Kings trustees there and his 
principall freinds here, which hitherto has been too much neg- 
lected, at least never effectually accomplished. Therfore since 
I have Jbeen obliged to make such a stay in this countrey, 
much longer than I expected, I think what you propose towards 
it absolutely necessary to begone about without delay. Its true 
I have conform to .my instructions and in the Kings name re- 
commended a true union amongst them, as being the only way 
to serve him and their country, strengthen them and defeat the 
.designs of his and their enimys : and now I shall endeavour to 

* Received 12 November 1725. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. gl~ 

know the sentiments of such as I have not yet been able to see, as 
well as those I have been with, so as to be in a condition to give 
as clear accounts of that affair as can be expected, which when 
I have finished, shall do my utmost to wait of you without giving 
you more trouble or inconveniencie than your present situation 
will allow of. As you observe, their are sevrall matters can be 
handled when togather, that are not proper to mention at a di- 
stance, besides that I have for good reasons dispatchd the ship 
which brought me to this countrie, so that must be provided for 
my return I know not where, being alreadie dissappointed of a 
fair veiw I had to that effect : mean time I beg youl be pleased to 
have ane eye to get me served in your own discreet way near 
that place. 

" I have sent you inclosed a letter to the King writ in a way 
he 3 ! understand, tho obscure to any other except one or 2 eni- 
ployd by him : you may likewise mention something of me in 
your letter to him, so as I may know his further commands your 
way, in case ft shoud happen by any unforseen accident, that I 
be obliged to stay in the country untill you have a return. 

" This is all I think needfull to write in answer to yours ; since 
I hope to see you, I shall not mention the difficultys I have been 
and am under in going about what I am charged with at this 
time : If Mr. Drummond delivers you this, he can inform you of 
my situation, but as the justness of what Ime about will cheiflie be 
a means to support me, so I hope the methods I use shall be 
blameless on my side, for personall danger I value it not, so as 
the .King nor any of his freinds do not suffer by it, which shall 
alwayes be my principall veiw. 

" As for your news concerning the Bishop, I am loath to give 
Credite to it, considering how I left matters, the quarter it came 
from, and the shortness of time since I parted from that country 
to produce so sudden and unexpected a change ; but as you no- 
tice, on another subject, that thers nothing happens in this world 
VOL. n. 2 F 



218 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

ought to seem strange, I shall not be too possitive in what I am 
not intirely sure of, only if it is so ther must be very good reason 
for it. As for James Murrays promotion, that I belive. I add 
no more but that I am with true esteem and sincerity Yours. 

" P. S. I belive you had better suspend any thing as to this 
countrie, since I design to see you, till meeting." ., 

Letter from Lord Inverness.* 

" October 27, 1725. 

" Sir, Your letter to the King of the 25 July is come safe : 
you have seen long before you receive this, by the Kings letter 
to you of the 1st September, that no forreigne assistance can be 
expected till winter is over ; he is hopefull that the ensuing spring 
may produce some favourable resolutions in his favours from 
some of the powers of Europe who seem split amongst them- 
selves ; and if the Kings informations be good, opposite allyances 
are alreadie concluded which must occasion a breach, from 
whence advantages not only may be drawn, but are with reason 
expected, which the King informs you of in the greatest con- 
fidence. 

"If the Highlanders have preserved the best of their arms, so 
much the better, but, as you said, if their persons remain un- 
toutched, what else happens can be of no bad consequence at 
least for some time, which makes the King very much approve 
the advice givn by his freinds, which was intirely agreeable to 
his sentiments from the beginning, his orders to assist the High- 
landers being only conditionall and in case they themselves shoud 
resolve to oppose the Goverment ; and if the Bishop of Rochester 
prest any of the clans at Paris to go to arms, it was more with a 
veiw of discovering a corrispondence which he suspected one of 
them to have independent of the others, and not with any reall 
design to bring them to order their followers to make opposition, 
for that was to have depended upon the clans at home as well as 

* Received 9 December 1725. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 219 

those abroad : however I belive the letter you saw coud be from 
no body but Seaforth, who by the accounts you have formerly 
ent and the remarks made at Paris, appeard to have sent his 
orders to his followers to deliver up their arms without consulting 
the rest or waiting the Kings opinion in the matter ; for Locheall 
and M'clean declared themselves readie to follow the directions 
the King shoud give them, either by writing or going themselves. 

" He expects your answer to his last before he sayes any thing 
particular as to a Generall or in whose hands the cheif authority 
ought to be placed. He is very sensible of the dissadvantage it 
woud be to his interest and to the country in generall were such 
of his freinds as are most capable of directing and advising either 
as to the civil or military, seized by the Goverment at the time 
of ane invasion. You yourselves can only lay doun the properest 
methods for preventing so great ane inconvenience : all that de- 
pends upon the King is to give you as timous warning as he may 
be able to do and prudence will allow him : The later certainly 
one is of stirring from home the belter, but that must depend on 
the intelligence the Goverment has and their proceedings upon 
it. I remember what past upon the summonds that were givn 
by the Goverment, in the 1715, for the Kings cheif freinds to 
come into Edinburgh ; and you may be assured that when any 
thing is to be undertaken, the King will have a particular veiw 
in preventing as much as can be by his conduct all the steps that 
may be takn by the Goverment to dissable his freinds from being 
usefull to their country. But I need not entertain you any longer 
on these matters, for wee have a long winter before us which will 
afford time enuff for discussions of this kind. He that has now 
the goverment of Edinburgh Castle was once lookt upon to be 
well affected ; coud measures be takn to gain that place, it woud 
be a noble stroke immediatly after a landing. 

" The King approves very much the confidence hi* freinds 
mention and are desirous to have in Captain Frazer ; I woud 



220 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

gladly send him a cypher, being informed by you sometime ago 
that Stratons was destroyed, but I dare not think of trusting it to 
the post, for wee have all the reason in the world to be more 
cautious than ever in conveying of letters even betwixt this and 
Holland : In the mean time the King desires you woud make him 
his compliments and assure him of the good opinion he alwayes 
had of him, and which he is confirmd in by so many of his best 
fjeinds. 

" The King is very much obliged to you for the particular ac- 
counts you give him of several particulars which I need not 
touch here, and is perswaded that youl slip no oppurtunity of 
improving the wrong steps of the Goverment to their dissad- 
vantage. 

" It was a great satisfaction to the King to hear that Major 
Walkinshaw was safe; he did not thiuk when he went home 
to have stayd ther so long and I think indeed he tempts his eni- 
mys too much. I am yours." 

About the latter end of this year 1725 the publick accounts 
brought the news of the Queens having deserted the King and 
retired into a convent, and it was soon confirmd from all quar- 
ters, tho no direct account came for a considerable time from the 
King, the letters which he writ on that subject being detaind in. 
Holland for want of a safe occasion of conveying them to Scot- 
land. I cannot pretend to narrate the true cause and history of 
this separation, but I will mention what was at that time reported, 
the trutli of which will probably in time, be determined, when 
the secret history is known. Mars partisans did affirm (and the 
account they gave was generally credited) that the Queen was 
jealous of ane amour twixt the King and Lady Inverness, who at 
the same time, with her husband who was the Kings favourite and 
primier minister, treated the Queen so insolently that she coud 
not bear it and was obligd to retire : and Mar pretended that 
having forseen long before, that the Queen woud be uneasie, and 



-i. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 221 

to prevent a rupture endeavoured to have Inverness and his Lady 
emoved, it gave the first rise to their malice, and was the occa- 
sion of the fall of his interest with the King. On the other side 
it was represented that Mrs. Sheldon ( jhq n i to Dillon and 
governess to the prince) had gaind ane absolute ascendance over 
the Queen, and being iutirely at Mars devotion was his spy in 
the family, and by his instigation blew the coall and incensed Her 
Majestic against Lord Inverness and keept the whole family in hot 
water: That for these reasons the King, being resolved to have 
her removed, began by taking the, prince out of her hands and 
delivering liim to tlie eare of Mr. Murray then created Earl of 
Dunbar : That the Queen violently opposed this, cheiflie out of 
regard to Mrs. Sheldon but appearingly because Dunbar was a 
Protestant, proposing therby to gain the Popish interest to give 
ear- to her articles of accusation against Inverness and Dunbar 
w.ho was brother to the Lady Inverness. The Kings trustees and 
freinds in Scotland were for a long time at a stand what to think, 
say or do for his service in this particular : Ther were so many 
instances givrx by persons well affected: to. the King, from their 
proper knowledge of the triumvirates insolence to. the Queen and 
others about the Court, that the same was scarcely to be doubted; 
but at the same time they endeavoured to: suppress such reports, 
because it was a terrible reflection on the. Kings honour and 
judgement not only to allow therof, but even break with the 
Queen rather than part with these favourites, when she com- 
plaind of them. 

Whilst people were under ane uneasiness to learn the true 
state of this affair, Allan Cameron came from the Highlands to 
Edinburgh about the beginning of January 1 726, and had fre- 
quent conferences with Kincardine and my self, after which wee 
brought him and the Duke of Hamilton togather. Wee soon 
perceived that Cameron was wholly in Invernesses interest, and 
wee concluded that besides what the King mentiond as his design 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

in sending him to the Highlands, he had the particular service 
of Inverness in charge, by endeavouring to remove any discon- 
tent amongst the Highlanders on account of Mars disgrace, 
who had establishd a pritty good interest amongst them by Cam- 
ple of Glenderowells means, and to fix in them a favourable opi- 
nion of Inverness and his ministry. Wee examined him narrowlie 
on what he thought might be the true ground and occasion of the 
quarrell twixt the King and Queen, but he pretended absolute 
ignorance therof : and having discoursed fully with him on the 
subject of the disarming act and the measures the King had once 
in veiw to take, the account he gave agreed, as I observed before, 
very near with the letter from one of the clans at Paris, with this 
addition, that the orders and instructions the King sent to Paris 
concerning opposing the Goverment and supporting the High- 
landers were conditional!, in case it appeared that the act was 
to be rigorouslie put in execution ; from which wee coud not but 
conclude, that the Kings letter to me concerning that affair was 
too generall and peremptor and that it was ane unaccountable 
ommission in his minister to suffer so long a space to pass with- 
out sending any other orders and advice to his trustees in Scot- 
land, and lastly that the turn which Inverness gives in his letter 
to that affair was not matter of fact, as at first sight it did not 
seem suitable to the Bishop of Rochesters capacity and experience 
in business. 

Some litle time before Cameron came to Edinburgh I dis- 
patchd the following letters. 

T)/> iYj-i j i*li i'// 
Letter to the King. 

" December 18, 1725. 

" Sir, In my former I acquainted you of the reason why I 
coud not give ane immediat return to yours of the 1st of Septem- 
ber, pnd tho I have by this time seen most of those with whom 
you intended I shoud talk on the subject therin containd, yet 
some obstacles stand in my way that prevent my giving you the 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 223 

satisfaction you demanded and expected, at least as to the way 
and manner, for the truth on't is their are severall whor reckond 
your freinds, to whom I do not think it proper to communicate 
what you wrot to me, in which I have the concurrance of Kin- 
cardine and Captain Frazer: Amongst these is principally the 
Duke of Hamilton ; for as I know that he aims at and expects to 
be at the head of your affairs, it was by no means expedient to 
mention to him the choise of a generall, untill you was apprized 
of some particulars relating to him and formd your judgement 
upon them; and as Lord Eglinton is absolutely under his in- 
fluence, it was also necessary to keep him in the dark, and like- 
wise Panmure, for a reason to be hereto subjoind ; so that Lord 
Wigtoun and Mr. Paterson being out of toun, and Lord Balme- 
rinoch, Dun, and Sir John Erskine too much, Ime affraid, attatchd 
to Mar, and Bishop Fullarton almost quite dozed, ther were none 
I coud freelie discourse with on the points you mention save 
Kincardine and Frazer, too small a number to offer ane advice 
on a matter of such importance; however least our opinions 
might be of any use to you, wee resolved to transmitt them with 
all due deference. 

" Taking it then for granted that in any attempt you'r to make, 
youl be supported with a forreign force such as may promise pro- 
bable hopes of success, tis thought your grand effort will be in 
England and the nearer to London so much the better, in which 
case all you will need or expect from Scotland will be a diver- 
sion to the standing forces there, so as to prevent their being 
calld into England, or to embarrass; them in their march so as to 
hinder their conjunction with the other troops. If the forces you 
send with that veiw into Scotland are able to make a stand against 
the regular forces, then sure the best place they can land at is the 
south side of Forth, because they may be joind by your freinds 
in the south and a communication be secured with England, 
wheras if they land on the north side of that river, these advan- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

tages will be prevented, whilst your freinds in tbe nortb need no 
belp : But if tlie troops you send are not so numerous, tlien tbey 
had best land in the Highlands, so as they may be quicklie joind 
by the clans. Which ever way you take, arms, ammunition, 
horse furniture, mony are all wanting here and must be supplyd 
elsewher, for your freinds are far from being in the condition 
they were in Anno 1715 : and tis necessary to send over a good 
number of officers, that is a few of rank and charactar and as 
many subalterns, Serjeants and corporalls as possible. As the 
aversion to the Union daylie increases, that is the handle by which 
Scotsmen will be incited to make a generall and zealous appear- 
ance : this your enimys know so well, that on former occasions 
all manner of pains were taken to buz in the peoples ears, that 
theyd be disappointed in what they expected from you, for that 
to gratifye your subjects of England, you was to uphold the 
Union. Now as I am morrally certain that the better part of En- 
gland are far from thinking- the Union beneficial! to either coun- 
trie, I cannot see but it is expedient to gratifye your Scots sub- 
jects and therby advance yowr own service, and in order therto, 
that, so soon as your forces land, a manifesto shoud be publishd, 
as you dcsignd formerlie, with respect to religion, laws &c. and 
containing ane ample plain assurance of your design to setfe and 
mantain the 2 kingdoms in their respective antient seperate in- 
dependent state, by dissolving the Union which is pernicious to 
both ; and tis tliought it woud be of vast service if, in tins mani- 
festo, you recommended to the electors in shires and brughs to 
have their thoughts on proper persons to be by them chosen to 
represent them, in a Scots Parliament, which it is your royal! in- 
tention shoud meet as SOOM as the state of affairs will allow, wher 
they may consult and make such laws as shall be judged needfull 
for securing the religion, laws and liberties of your antiewt king- 
doms: were somecoppys-therof printed and sent over prsoviodslfe 
so as to be readie to be dispersed initnediaflly on a landing, it woud 






REGISTER OF LETTERS. 225 

answer the design to better purpose, but that must be done with 
the utmost caution and care to prevent a discovery and seizure. 

" These are some of the cheif matters that occurrd to us in 
generall, and to be more particular was what wee coud not pre- 
tend to, unless wee knew the time and nature of your design 
more particularly. The choise of a generall is a matter of the 
utmost importance: coud one get his wish, he d be a native of 
good rank and charactar and well versed in both civill and mili- 
tary affairs ; but one with these endowments is not Ime affraid 
to be got, and therfore it woud appear that this defect must be 
supplyd by branching out these severall powers into diverse 
hands, that is, that the management of the military be placed in 
a bred souldier (which none of your side of the question now in 
this country can pretend to be) who shoud corrispond and live 
in perfect good terms with him or them wher the supreme power 
in other matters is lodged, or be perhaps in some degree of sub- 
ordination therto, who nevertheless shoud be expresslie in- 
structed and required to move intirely by the advice and direc- 
tion of the generall in all military concerns : coud such ane har- 
mony be effectually mantaind amongst such people, this or some 
such in the present situation woud seem the most probable 
scheme, and of all others the Duke of Hamilton appears to be 
the most proper person in whom this supreme power shoud be 
repossd, as his being the first Peer woud give no occasion for 
emulation and grudges in others, and that his family being known 
over all Europe, his being at the head woud give a reputation to 
the affair. But then hes young and hath no experience in bu- 
siness of any kind, nay notwithstanding all that your and his 
own freinds have said to him, his bypast life hath been intirely 
devoted to diversions idleness and a botle amongst a set of peo- 
ple no wayes fit companions for one of his rank, by which con- 
duct he hath intirely lost his charactar and run himself over head 
and ears in debt. On these accounts it was that wee woud not 
VOL. H. 2 G 












226 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 






mention this particular to him, till wee had informed you of his 
conduct and behaviour, wherby you might regulate your reso- 
lutions as to him. But at the same time wee must do him the 
justice to- own he's a young man of excellent good sense and ca- 
pacity and in all appearance unviolably attatchd to your cause, 
and wee cannot but hope that if he were once dipt and in a tract 
of business, hed alter his wayes and in that case be the most sig- 
nificant person for your service: and if you have any veiws to- 
wards him, twoud be very necessary that you writ or instructed 
some person to acquaint him, that as it was probable youd ere 
long have ane occasion to employ him in ane eminent station, 
you coud not but recommend to him, to be carefull in cultivating 
a good understanding with your freinds and rendering himself 
capable to answer the trust you reposed in him and do you the 
service you expected from him. Wee submitt how far it woud 
be expedient that you named a Counsill by whose advice and 
concurrance all matters were to be transacted. This is the sum of 
what wee judged proper to lay before you on this important sub- 
ject, without presuming to offer any judgement of our own in it. 
" I had almost forgot to add that after whatever manner you 
place the cheif authority in the civill or military, their woud be 
ane officer appointed to have the immediate command of the 
clans, and wee know of none so fit as Generall Gordon, tho at 
the same time weer strangers to his behaviour for severall years 
bypast, which may indeed give rise for changing measures as to 
him. 

-i" As I have for a course of many years been in a state of inti- 
macie and freindship with Panmure, I was sensible enuff of some 
singularitys in his temper and that it required some litle manage- 
ment to keep well with him, and as he's a person of good parts 
and ane establishd charactar, I thought it my duty to succomb 
and humour him in things not very material!. For some 18 or 
20 months bypast I was much surprised at Ms conduct, for it 







REGISTER OF LETTERS. 227 



very evidently appeard that he underhand fomented and sup- 
ported the malecon tents of Angus in the noise and buzle they 
made and make in opposition to the Colledge of Bishops, and I 
took the libertie not long- ago to tell him he was highly blame- 
able, when by the trust you reposed in him he ought rather to 
have prevented than contributed to raise divisions amongst your 
fi-einds : wee both turnd warm, and he dropt some expressions 
in regard to your rights and interest that I coud not pass by ; 
however as I reckond they proceeded from too much heat and 
passion, I resolved to take no further notice of them till tother- 
day, when in presence of my other two freinds wee discoursed ai^ 
a distance on the subjects containd in your letter to which this is 
a reply, he turud all into a jest, and fell soon into a passion, 
swearing that it was madness to propose any thing to bef.done 
for you, and that none but madmen woud engage in such ane af- 
fair. In short he went on at such a rate, that after leaving him, 
wee all 3 concluded that tho lies well enuff' pleased to be reckoned 
a Jacobite during the present situation of affairs, he has resolved 
not to venture further or medle, if any thing in earnest comes 
upon the carpet, and woud therfore wish that matters stand as 
they are ; how far this conjecture is just, I shant possitively say, 
but it woud appear to be too well founded, especially seing it is 
certain he's absolutely governd by his eldest son, who makes 
no scruple of owning a great resentment at the loss of *^)e 
family estate and the cause that occasiond it ; nay \vhen L 
spoke of this tother day to the Duke of Hamilton, he told me 
that being a young man he was unwilling to say any thing 
to the prejudice of ane establishd reputation such as Panmures, 
but he had good reasons to belive the son had made advances 
last winter to the Goverment and woud stand at nothing to 
get back the estate and honours of the family. Twas thought 
proper I shoud acquaint you of this, and you know beet what 
use to make of it; and till wee have your: Aiijection^ ,s r e,e,j?e- 






REGISTER OF LETTERS. 


solve to act very cautiouslie in trusting him with particulars of 
moment and yet keep as well as can be with him, so as to avoid 
giving him any cause of complaint. 

" By what is represented in this letter, youl see your trustees 
are reduced to a small number, and tho formerlie on very good 
grounds you declined making any addition, yet now perhaps 
when time hath made such alterations in the sentiments and be- 
haviour of so many persons, youl think it proper to change your 
mind, and in that case the Earl of Strathmore and Mr. James 
Graham are by the Duke of Hamilton and Earl of Kincardine 
thought proper persons to serve you; the one is a man of in- 
terest and the other a good lawer and fit to give advice, and 
both are perfectlie well affected towards you. 

" The enclosed is from Thomas S'clare, the contents I do not 
know, tho I fancy tis with respect to his own circumstances or 
his negotiations with the Cameronians, for which he shewed 
me a signd manual! from you. As I know him to be a faithful! 
zealous servant of yours, I coud not refuse his earnest pressing 
entreaties to forward the enclosed to you under my cover. In 
mine to Inverness is enclosed to you a letter from Cameron, con- 
cerning whom I refer to what I have mentioned in that letter. 
a! Weer just now upon setting some measures afoot that will tend, 
I hope, to keep up the peoples spirit of resentment against the 
Goverment. 

"I pray God you may be enabled to lay hold of this and every 
fair opportunity of doing yourself right and releiving your op- 
pressed people. I am, &c." 

T IT 'MiKJ>H! '" f::l<-.ii(;--Jo -jj.s; :' > O'jil'i 

Letter to Lord Inverness. 

"18 December 1725. 

" Sir, In my former letters I acquainted both the King and 
you why I coud not give immediatly a distinct return to some of 
the cheif particulars mentiond in his of the 1st of September and 
now again touched in yours of the 27 of October, which I had 








REGISTER OF LETTERS. 229 

W 

the honour to receive a few dayes ago ; and having now writ pritty *,. 

fully to the King himself on these heads, I need not repeat the same 

and will only add that wee will do our best to have things right 

ordered here, when the long-lookd-for hour comes ; and that it may 

be soon and quicklie (being the English of suum cinque) is the 

earnest desire of all possesst with a sense of ther duty to the King 

and of the unhappy circumstances of this countrie. 

" Till 'lother day that I received a letter from Allan Cameron, 
I belived he was gone a considerable time ago, but it seems he 
has been detaind longer in the Highlands than he expected and 
designd, and being obliged to dispatch the ship he had provided 
in the north for his return, he writes to me that he'l sometime 
after this be here with me, and desires me to look out for a ship 
to carry him from this part of the country either to France or 
Holland, which I shall take care of: how long it may be ere I 
see him I cant tell, but it woud appear it wont be soon, because 
he desires me to forward the enclosed to the King and to acquaint 
you of these his measures, that in case the King has any com- 
mands that may reach him ere he goes off, they may be trans- 
mitted thorow my canal. I am well assured that Wade knew of 
his being in Scotland, being likewise informed (true or false I 
know not) that ther was a ship that under pretence of fishing 
hovered on the coast to carry him back; and as tis probable that 
Wade has laid traps to catch him, that I fancy is the reason of 
his resolution of coming to Edinburgh, wher, especially in the 
winter time, with any tollerable degree of caution, he may be 
safe enuff. 

" You need be under no apprehension for Walkinshaw ; his 
being in Scotland is no secret, and he's every night in the taverns 
at Glasgow or Edinburgh under the favourite name of Campbell^ 
but as tis known that he came over purely to setle his private 
affairs and he has no personall enimys, no notice is takn of him.,, 

" Coud what you propose as to Edinburgh Castle be brought 






^^ 30 REOISTKK OF LETTERS. 

about, it woud, no doubt ont, be a very grand point gaind, but 
. I can form no hopes therof. When the attempt was made in 
1715, the garison was very weak, being a few infirm creatures 
and the very best of them were well disposed, of which I was so 
very well assured by the dealings I had with them (being then at, 
prisoner) that when the design was notifyed to me, I pressd that 
they shoud rather make the attempt at the very principal 1 gate, 
and I woud engage Charles Stuart the porter to leave it unlockd ; 
but my proposall did not relish. The case is now very different; 
the garison has been purged again and again, and ther marches 
thither every day 40 men from the Canongate guard, and most of 
the principal! officers are English: what you say of Brigadeer 
Preston was true enuff whilst his cusen Ormond and patron Mar 
(as he then stiled them) were in prosperity; then, indeed I be- 
live, had the stroke been made, hed have acted a part in it, but 
the niinute that the face of affairs turnd, so did he, and from being 
a well bred good nalured gentleman, became the very reverse, 
which all (especially such of us as had been his best freinds be- 
fore) that were prisoners under his command perceived many 
different wayes. In short he's a poor weak biggotted creature, 
intirely under the influence of the Justice Clerk, and tis in vain 
to expect any thing from him. 

" Lord Airlie, after having a conference atrBannockburn with 
Wade, is now in toun in cog, waiting till the generall, whos 
lately gone to London, send doun the remission he promised to 
obtain for him. Wade made no secret of his being instructed to 
promise pardons to all (except a few such as Ormond, Mar, 
Marshall) that were attainted and applyd to him, and he has ac- 
cordingly givn assurances to most of the Mkenzies, Stuart of 
Appin and sevrall others. 

" Your certainly in the right to be exceeding cautious in your 
dispatches, for no pains are ommiltcd to make discoverys. The 
Goverment of this country is intirely in Argylcs or rather Hayes 

V 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 231 

hands,. and the Campbells are very uppish and insolent. Their 
merit consists in undertaking to carry thorow the malt tax, as 
the Squadrone's was fonnerlie in supporting the commissioners of 
enquiry into the forfeited estates; so that each party raise them- 
selves by alternate hardships on their native countrie: wee were 
in hopes the Squadrone woud have kickd out, but theyr a mean* 
spirited dastardly set, and will come into no measures that may 
irritate their good masters in England so as to cutt them off from 
hopes of being again takn into favour. 

" Thers a new scheme soon (as its expected) to take place, 
viz. the President of the Session is to demitt and to have a pen- 
sion of 1000J., and his second son is to succeed Lord Grange who's 
to be made president. This last promotion seems to have some 
connection with the conduct of his brother, and most people, 
who even know nothing of private particulars, conclude Mar 
must be in no bad terms with the Goverment, when his brother 
and confident is advanced to the post of greatest influence in this 
country. 

" Weer just now on a project of selling a corrispondence di- M 
rectlie twixt the cheifs of the clans and the Kings trustees, which 
hath hitherto been much wanted and may be of use to keep ane 
uniformity in measures and prevent the snares laid by some from 
taking effect. 

" I find great pains are takn by Mars freinds to represent the 
Bishop of Rochester as ane enimy to this kingdom, to counter 
which I have made no secret of what the King and you wrot for- 
merlie of his inclinations and behaviour in that particular, which 
hath had good effects with severall especially of the Highlands. 

" Mr. Frazer returns his most humble service to you, and de- 
sires youd assure the King of his inviolable attachment to him 
and his cause. I have now without any order mentioned what- 
ever occurrd to me as proper to be communicated to you, and I 
have only to add that I am in the most respectfull manner Yours, 



t 



232 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

" P. S. The King has tother day lost a faithfull usefull servant, 
by the death of Bishop Irvine, and twil be no easie matter to 
supply his place, as he was the only one of all the present Bishops 
fit to succeed Fullarton whos quite dozed and cant last long. 
Some propose Mr. Ratary of Craig-hall, and woud he lay his 
whims aside till a more proper juncture, he's a very fit person, 
as he's a man of good sense and learning and has an e estate to 
support his rank. Others propose your and my old freind John 
Gillane, who's been in orders for some years, and is in as great 
esteem as any of the Episcopall clergy in Edinburgh. You know 
him to be ane excellent man in all respects. You shall hear 
from me fully on this subject when I have got the sentiments of 
the Kings freinds collected, and something must be done soon to 
prevent factions and divisions amongst men honestlie inclined." 

About the begining of February 1726 Allan Cameron saild 
from Leith in a ship bound for Holland wher he safely arrived; 
with him I sent the following letters to the Xing. 

"January 18, 1726. 

""Sir, I wrot both to you and Inverness on the 18th ult, 
these letters I know lay a long time at Leith waiting for a ship, 
and being in the countrie whilst I write this, I cannot tell whither 
theyr gone or not; if not, tis probable they'l come to you alongst 
with the bearer hereof with whom I have so fully conversed on 
all your affairs, that I .need not mention any thing in this, but 
remitt all to the report he will make to you. 

" I cannot however ommitt acquainting you that your freinds 
are under the greatest consternation at the storys publickly 
handed about here, to the great delight of your enimys, concern- 
ing you and your family, of which having no particular accounts 
from you they do not well .know what to say or how to behave, 
and are even affraid to corrispond till they are sure matters are 
so adjusted and regulated as their may be no hazard in it: va-< 
rious are the reports of various peoples conduct and the resolu- 

* 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 233 

- :..*% 

tions youve thought fit to take; and what to make or even 
think of them your best freinds are at a loss, and will be at a 
stand till they hear more of them. The unanimity you so ear- 
nestlie recommend to your freinds here is as necessary elsewhcr, 
as divisions give your enimys fresh hopes and new handles to 
work on, and mightily discourage even those that are most zea- 
lous in your service. Tis a hard case that people suffering for 
one and the same good cause and having no prospect of releife 
but by and thorow one events coming to pass, shoud by jarrs or 
immoderate unseasonable selfish veiws act diametrically opposite 
therto; and if these are the unevitable consequences of mini- 
sters of the first rank, it woud appear more your interest to lay 
all such aside, and carry on your business by your own proper 
directions thorow some other more subaltern canals whol be 
more observant of your orders and not so high minded: Pardon 
my using the libertie to mention matters with such libertie; what 
I say proceeds from a disinterested concern for your prosperity 
and is the opinion of all your freinds, founded on the reports 
they have of what has lately past in your family, the welfare 
wherof they have much at heart. 

" I shoud injure both you and my self, if I did not let you know 
that accounts are sent here of some particulars mentiond in my 
letters of late to yovi, and which line sure you did not designe no 
more than I did expect they shoud be so publickly and so parti- 
cularly talkd of. I have not yet got so far to the bottom of the 
story as to discover whence the intelligence comes, but Ime too 
well convinced that some people about you have acted a part 
neither fair nor prudent; otherwise tis utterlie impossible that 
some here shoud have notice of some particulars which they tell 
me I writ to you: with what intent such intelligences are sent, I 
know not, but this 1 know that theyr in the hands of such as 
make no right use of them. Having the occasion of this bearer 
I have sent a new cypher, which in some respects is better 

VOL. II. 2 H 



234 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

adapted to our correspondence than the last, which by the bye 
has likewayes been long enuff in the feild. 

" I have only to add that your freinds here, from what seems 
to be brewing in Europe, were in full hopes of seing ere long 
something cast up for your interest, but are at present in the ut- 
most concern and almost despair till they hear directlie and di- 
stinctly from you. I am &c." 

Letter to the King. 

"January 25, 1726. 

"Sir, Since my last, a few dayes ago, a wel wisher of yours put 
into my hands the enclosed paper concerning the state of Britain 
as to some particulars of trade and the prospect of the war that 
is expected to brake out, w r ith what intention I know not, but I 
having this good occasion thought ther coud be no harm in send- 
ing it to you. There seems to be a generall expectation that 
something ere long will be attempted for you, which gives your 
freinds occasion tp think on such measures as may seem expedient 
for you prseviouslie to take, and I was directed to transmit! the 
enclosed 2 clauses, as what to them appear proper to be part of 
your manifesto and indemnity and are by them submitted to your 
judgement. I am &c." 

The memoriall concerning trade and war mentioned in the 
above letter was calculated for 2 purposes. First to convince 
the King and forreigne Princes that tho the Ostend Company 
was prejudiciall to the immediat profit and benefite of some par- 
ticular private persons or societys, it did not interfere with any 
branch of trade that was realy benificiall to Britain or esteemd as 
such, and therfor a war commenced or pretended to be com- 
menced principally to force ane abolition of that Company, woud 
not be reckond a nationall cause and engage the hearts of the 
people to contribute chearfully towards it, nay it woud rather 
provoke them to grudge and repine at the taxes and loss of trade 
that woud follow upon such a war, which might be improved to 






REGISTER OP LETTERS. 235 

good purpose, if any thing particularly for the King was at- 
tempted. 

The other part was from a consideration that the powerfull 
fleet of England was a bar on all attempts of sending over a body 
of troops to encourage and assist the Kings subjects at home. 
It was therfore proposed that the King woud prevail with the 
Emperor to set him at the head of ane army (having good gene- 
rall officers under him) with which he shoud attack the duke- 
dome of Hanover and seize on the same, as what he had right to 
retain untill the Prince therof restored him to the possession of 
what he detaind from him. A vigorous push on this quarter 
woud have the same effects as ane attempt on Britain, at least fa- 
cilitate such an attempt if judged necessary and practicable, and 
woufd encoiirage and enable the Kings freinds at home when a 
diversion was given that woud be of the utmost consequence; 
for as King Georges affection and regard to his German domi- 
nions lay nearest his heart, he woud bend his greatest care and 
cheif efforts to defend them, and rather than run the hazard of 
losing them or even seeing them ruind by being the seat of a 
bloodie war, woud think of making up terms with the King, es- 
pecially when tis well enuff known how litle concern he has for 
the person calld his son and successor; and altho a considerable 
part of the British shoud stand by the Prince with a design to 
set him on the throne, tis not to be doubted but in such a strange 
jumble of affairs and interests, others woud think of applying to 
the King, when they perceived the Revolution party split into 
peices and the King at the head of a powerfull army abroad and 
his freinds declaring for him at home. This scheme was fully 
laid open to shew how practicable it was in its self and how be- 
nificiall it might prove not only to facilitate the Kings restora- 
tion, but also to procure what the Emperor and his allys aimd at 
with respect to the present state of Europe. 



236 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

The clause designd for the manifesto was in the terms men- 
tiond in my letter to the King 18 December 1725, and that for 
the indemnity was with a particular veiw to exclude those .that 
had cheiflie been instrumentall in carrying on and accomplishing 
the Union, which at the same time was to be so couched and ex- 
pressd, as not to be observed in the generall pardon it woud be 
necessary for the King to grant: In order therto, a clause was so 
conceived as to leave a door open to get in upon those perfidious 
instruments of that unparalelld treacherie to their country, if ever 
Scotland was so happy as to have a Parliament within herself, 
that woud do justice to the honour of the nation, by redressing 
wherin it was so scandalouslie violate, and providing against the 
like for the future; for procuring wherof nothing coud be more 
effectuall than a publick brand of infamy on those who had the 
cheif hand therin. Tho this was the aim of the few that con- 
certed this clause, they did not think it expedient to let the King 
into the secret, because some about him, particularly Inverness, 
were either themselves, or had near relations as deep dipt as most 
others, and twas to be feard they might divert the King from ap- 
proving it, if so be they knew what was secretly intended by it* 

Letter to the King. 

" 31 January, 172ff. 

" Sir, Having since the date of my last, a few dayes ago, 
ane occasion to converse with some of the Episcopal Clergy and 
others well affected to Church and State, I judged it my duty to 
give you this further trouble on a subject wherin I humblie con- 
ceive your interest is concerned. I have in some of my former 
letters meiitiond Bishop Fullartons being very much decayd, and 
as he becomes daylie more and more so, tis plain he cannot long 
subsist, at least will be, if he is not alreadie in a great measure, 
uneapable of business. I take it to be a matter of very great mo- 
ment in your service to preserve the face and authority of the 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 237 

Church of Scotland, arid therfore the same reasons that moved you 
to provide formerlie for the event of Bishop Fullartons death by 
your directions in favours of Bishop Irvine, do still subsist and re- 
quire your interposing in the same manner, now Irvine is dead. 
I do confess tis no easie matter to supply the room of that worthy 
person, who had nothing so much at heart as your and the 
Churches interest, and wanted not courage to go thorow with 
what he thought his duty; and amongst the present number of 
Bishops ther is not one fit to be placed at the head of the Church, 
and it will require your most serious consideration to determine 
yourself in that particular. In the mean time it appears neces- 
sary to take such precautions as may prevent divisions and con- 
fusions. If Bishop Cant was not by reason of his old age become 
very infirm, he's a person qualifyed in all respects to be at the 
head of any Church in Christendome, being a man of great learn- 
ing and integrity; however he may be able to official for some 
time, till you come to a finall resolution. Thers another, Bishop 
Duncan, tho not a man of such parts and learning as the other, 
yet eminently distinguished and estecmd for his great probity and 
zeall for your and the Churches interest. I ani therfore of opinion 
that it wOud be for your service that with the very first occasion, 
you write a letter to the Colledge of Bishops signifying that wheras 
you'r informed Bishop Fullarton is become so infirm that it is not 
to be expected he can subsist long, at least that it is probable he 
may be obliged to retire to the countrie for his health, and being- 
desirous in either of these cases to provide for the peace and wel- 
fare of the Church, it is your pleasure that either Bishop Cant or 
Bishop Duncan, as shall appear most convenient, do in either of 
these events reside at Edinburgh, to preside in the Coledge of 
Bishops and take care of the affairs of theChurch in your capitall 
of Edinburgh and diocesse therof* untill you determine yourself 
in the choise of a person duelie qualifyed and agreeable to your 
people to be setled in a post of such consequence with respect to 



238 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

the interest of both Church and State. I have mentioned the 
alternative of these 2 persons, least sickness &c. may impede any 
one of them from answering the end you propose by this letter, 
and that of the Colledge ther is not another fit for the post. If 
Fullarton dye before your commands in this particular does come, 
I shall attend the Colledge and let them know what your pleasure 
was in case Bishop Irvine had been alive, and I doubt not but 
they will therupon delay all further proceedings till your pleasure 
is known. What I here offer is only my own opinion, none of 
your trustees that I incline to speak to on the subject being in 
town, but at the same time I am very positive it woud be ap- 
proved by such of them whose opinion you d most relye on, other- 
wayes I woud not have presumed to offer what was only sup- 
ported by my own private judgement. It will be absolutely ne- 
cessary that you have your thoughts and come as soon as possi- 
ble to a resolution in the choise of a person to succeed Fullarton 
and be at the head of the Church, and in truth tis a matter of 
such moment and thers so few fit for it to choise upon, that 
I will not take on me to give you any advice, but I shall as 
fast as possible know the sentiments of your best freinds and 
most proper judges, and report faithfully to you: One thing Ime 
sure of, that (considering the age and infirmitys of the 2 persons 
I have named for the present job) none of the present Bishops 
will be thought proper, and that therfore your freinds endeavour 
will be to find out some person with endowments suitable to the 
charge, and at the same time in such a state of health and of 
such ane age as that thers some probability he may continue in 
the office for some time, ther being many inconveniencies that 
happen from changes, especially at the distance you are and un- 
der the present circumstances, which I pray God may be soon 
altered to the better. 

" Since sealing up my former packet I unexpectedlie had ane 
opportunity of talking very fully with Mr. Cameron on severall 



REGISTER OP LETTERS, 

subjects, by which he may explain severall points not clearlie 
enuff perhaps expressd in what I have wrot, and mention some 
things wholly ommitted, particularly concerning a corrispon- 
dence being established betwixt your freinds here and those you 
trust with your affairs at Paris and London, for at present weer 
under a totall state of ignorance. I desired him also to mention 
to you a certain particular that related only to myself: whatever 
may be my motives and inclinations therin, I submitt myself in- 
tirely to your pleasure, being resolved that no consideration what- 
soever shall come into the scales with the duty I owe you and the 
zeall I have for your interest and service, tho at the same time I 
am sure neither will sustain any prejudice from what I aim at, 
their being no want of those who can in all respects perform 
what hath been for some years past my province and whol un- 
dertake it very chearfully and more agreeably, I imagine, to 
some that I dare say wish you very well. 

" I have Ime affraid overacted my part in the number and 
length of my letters of late, but at the same time I know you have 
goodness enuff te forgive what is done with a good intention 
by Yours." 

Before the Parliament met it was judgcl proper to set some na- 
tionall measures afoot, and accordingly ane address was signd 
by a great body of the barons &c. of the shire of Edinburgh, 
setting forth the unability of the Scots to pay the malt tax: and 
to Mr. Dundas their representative was given a signd instruction 
to complain of the abuse in naming persons to be justices of the 
peace in shires wher they had no estates, and particularly that 
officers of the army shoud be named in so many shires, and to 
move for a bill limiting the qualifications of all justices of the 
peace, so as none shoud exerce that office who had not 200/. 
Scots of valued rent within the shire wher he was named. Other 
shires quicklie followed the example of the shire of Edinburgh, by 
addressing and giving instructions in the like manner, and these 






240 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

addresses were presented at the proper seasons without any good 
effects; for the malt tax was again imposed, and otherwayes in- 
deed coud not well happen, when some of the Scots members 
spoke against reducing the duty to 3 halfpence per bushell, affirm- 
ing the Scots were able and willing to pay 3 pence, since by a 
new clause the surplus, that is in so far as the duty shoud raise 
above 20000/. sterling, was to be employed for improving the 
manufactures of Scotland, and not one of the other members ap- 
peard for reducing it to 3 halfpennies except Mr. Dundas, which 
the Ministry represented was more out of disgust for the loss of 
his place, than any new light he had got this that he wanted last 
session. This bait of the application of the surplus was a mere 
bite, as it lasted only for a year and tended to draw the Scots in 
to submitt and be accustomed to this odious tax, after which it 
was at any time in the Ministrys power to drop it and apply the 
whole to the publick. 

It wont be out of the way here to take notice that Daniell 
Campbell had the assurance to apply by a petition to the House 
of Commons setting forth what had Implied to him at Glasgow 
and craving redress: In this he was strenouslie supported by the 
Ministry and all .Argyles faction, and a bill was brought in and 
past both Houses enabling King George to give him 6000 and odd 
pounds starling towards making up his loss, and that the King 
shoud have right to the duty on ale vended in Glasgow (which 
by a late law was granted to the magistracy as ane additionall 
revenue to the said toun) untill he was refounded of that sum. 
How Campbell pretended to make up his loss to such a sum I 
cant tell, but thers all the reason imaginable to belive it coud not 
possibly amount to the 6lh part of it: for as he was threatned 
and did expect what happcnd, it is not to be imagined, that 
when he retired into the countrie with his wife and family, but 
he woud likewise take the mony, Jewells, bank notes and plate 
which he pretended to lose ; and tho the house and furniture had 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

all been utterlie destroyed, it was not worth half the sunv, whear 
as the outward fabrick (as the law directs in such cases) was re- 
paird at the publick expence of the toun, and a great part of the 
furniture was saved or recovered, so that the wainscotting of the 
house and a few scrub figures called statues in the court were 
only destroyd. But the Ministry were resolved to do something 
to purpose towards gratifying their creature, and tis probable 
some trustie fellow tool went snips with him. Before I leave this 
subject I must remark that the magistrates of Glasgow raised 
a criminall process against Captain Bushell, who commanded 
the souldiers in Glasgow, before the Lords of Justiciary ; but the 
Solicitor, in the Advocats absence, refused his concurrance, and 
before that coud be supplyed according to the forms usuall in 
such cases, the Captain, who was retired from Scotland, obtaind 
King Georges remission, and as that was not a sufficient gratifica- 
tion for his having murdered so many innocent persons, a troop 
of dragoons was also conferred upon him, he being formerlie in 
the foot service. 

Letter from Lord Inverness.* 

" November 17, 1725. 

" Tho the Kings ordering me to give you a particular account 
of ane unluckie and unfortunate schene that has appeard here 
these dayes by past be a mark of His Majesties confidence in you, 
yet that wont in the least diminish your concern for the resolution 
the Queen has taken of retiring to a convent. The King thinks 
it necessary that his faithfull subjects every wher shoud be in- 
formed that nothing has been wanting on his part to divert the 
Queen from so extroardinary a step, and in so far I think I can- 
not execute His Majesties commands better than by sending you 
the enclosed memoire, with coppies of 2 letters the King wrot to 
the Queen at seasonable times before she retired. Pains has like- 

* Received 26 February 1726. 
VOL. II. 2 I 



243- . WBGISTEH OF LETTERS. 

wise been takn to inform the Queen by proper persons of the 
consequences of such a step, but all in vain: so, as this matter 
cannot but make a noise, His Majestic orders that you may let 
the truth be known to those of his subjects who are in your part*. 
ll is manifest that this foolish affair is the consequence of ane old 
project hatched elsewher, but put in execution here without the 
least prudence or good conduct. Mrs. Sheldoris behaviour, and 
the continuall instances she gave the King of her irritating the 
Queen on every trifling occasion, obliged the King to discharge 
her his service, and it is evident that it has been by her means 
that this affair lias been conducted. The King orderd she shoud 
be furnislied with every thing necessary for her journey into 
France and a gentleman to conduct her, but she took the party 
to retire into a convent, I suppose not to leave the main veiw un- 
executed, which at last lias been effected. 

" Ime heartily sorry, sir, to have had occasion to write to you 
on so dissagreeable a subject; However I am thorowlie convinced, 
as indeed the King is, that youl neglect nothing to set this affair 
in a true light. The King ordered all the Lords and Gentlemen 
of his Court to assemble yesterday morning, and then made them 
a speech in which he informed them fully of all the severall steps 
he had taken to prevent this extroardinary proceeding of the 
Queens and of the whole particulars of his conduct upon ane oc- 
casion which he found to be equally unfortunate to him and 
them : His Majesties expressions were so moving, and his sub- 
jects were so satisfyed with his conduct, that it only served to 
confirm in them their attachment to his person: His Majestic- 
amongst other things assured them that it shoud be his principall 
care to educate his 2 sons in such a manner as might enable 
them one day to make his people happy, which was the thing 
in the world he had most at heart. I am with great sincerity 
Yours." 

Follows a coppy of the memoire. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 24 $ 



" Rome, November 13, 1725. 

" It has been the constant practice of the King's enemies to 
project measures for sowing divisions and misunderstandings 
amongst those who are thoroughly fixed in their loyalty to His 
Majesty and are most capable to serve him, and by the means of 
those who still pretended to adhere to it, to draw him by specious 
appearances into steps against his honour and the good of his 
service. 

" His Majesty had reason to think that by the prudent mea- 
sures he had taken, he would not have been much troubled for 
-the. future by such contrivances; but these days past have af- 
forded but too strong and too publick an instance of the con- 
trairy. 

"It is some time since the King suspected that his enemies and 
pretended friends, finding that they could not impose upon His 
-Majesty, were endeavouring by malicious insinuations to animate 
the Queen against His Majesty's most faithful servants, and par- 
ticularly against him who had the greatest share in his confi- 
dence and affairs, in hopes no doubt, by that means to compass 
what they dispair'd of being able to come at by any other; and 
they so far succeeded that for some time past the Queen could 
not conceal her dislike to such persons, and the King could easily 
see that her behaviour towards himself was alter'd, altho' he could 
not discover any real ground for either one or t'other. His Ma- 
jesty was therefor willing to impute them to ill offices and hu- 
mour, which lie hop 'd would pass with a little time andpatienee 
on his part, and therefore he did not make any change in his con- 
duct towards the Queen, who ever since her marriage had been 
entirely mistriss of his purse, such as it is in his bad circumstances. 
His Majesty also continued to her the same liberty she had al- 
ways enjoy'd, of going out and coming home when she pleased, 
of seeing what company she liked best, and of corresponding 
with whonvshe thought fit, and to encourage her diverting and 



T 244 REGISTEtt OF LETTERS. 

amusing herself more than had hitherto appeard agreeable to her 
inclinations. 

" In this state of things the King could not but be astonished 
to the last degree when he was told by one much in the Queen's 
confidence, that if he did not dismiss the Earl of Inverness from 
his service,^she would retire into a convent, altho' she did not 
give any reason for so extraordinary a proposal and resolution; 
and on Friday last the Queen told the King herself that she was 
resolved to retire, but still without bringing any reasons for it, 
and has seemd to persist ever since in this resolution, tho' with- 
out coming to the execution, altho' on the Friday she had ac- 
tually taken leave of some ladys here on that account. 

" The King could not but be sensible of the indignity done 
him by this publick way of proceeding ; but as he was perswaded 
the Queen had been misled and might be reclahn'd, he had much 
more compassion for her having thus exposed herself than resent- 
ment against the unjust eclat she had made, and therefor not 
only continued to live with her as usual, but invited her in the 
most moving terms to own her error and return to her duty, nei- 
ther of which she has yet done, but it is to be hoped she soon will, 
by the prudent and moderate measures the King is taking in 
order to reclaim her. 

" The King really thought all this while that Lord Inverness 
was the chief object of these designs, for tho' Her Majestys great 
and publick uneasyness had begun on her first being acquainted 
with the Princes being to be taken out of Mrs. Sheldon's hands, 
yet Her Majesty had expressed herself to severall persons favour- 
ably of Lord Dunbar, and had never mentiond to the King the 
least dislike or disapprobation of that Lords being governour to 
the Prince, which made it appear the more extraordinary to His 
Majesty, when in a conversation he had on Monday last with a 
person of great worth and consideration of this place (who he 
knew had been endeavouring to prevail on Her Majesty not to 






REGISTER OP LETTERS. 245 

'do both the King and herself the injury of retireing into a convent) 
lie found that she was, if possible, more uneasy on Lord Dunbar's 
account than on Lord Inverness's, under pretence that the Princes 
religion was in danger while he had the care of them, and that 
Her Majesty was perswaded that those two Lords were obnox- 
ious to his English friends and that tlteir being about his person 
was one of the greatest obstacles to his restoration. 

" As Lord Inverness was extremely afflicted at the Queens be- 
haviour on this occasion and to think that he might be repre- 
sented as the unfortunate, tho' innocent, occasion of a dissunion 
betwixt their Majesties, he did most earnestly intreat of the King 
that he would allow him to retire from, business, which nothing 
but His Majesty's orders to the contrairy in the most peremptory 
manner, could have prevented ; His Majesty having at the same 
time assured both Lord Dunbar and him that their remaining in 
his service under circumstances so very disagreable, was the 
strongest instance they could possibly give him of their inviolable 
atlatchment to his person and cause. 

" All these facts and circumstances put together, it is very easy 
to see that in all these matters the Queen must have been origi- 
nally imposed upon and guided, not by turbulent and factious 
friends but by real enemies who would have drove the King to 
that extremity, as either to see his wife abandon him, or by yeilcl- 
ing to her unjust demands, give up the management of his chil- 
dren and his affairs and put himself into the hands, not of the 
Queen but of those who it was manifest had in their view the 
ruin of both. 

" The King is sensible how prejudicial to his intrest this un- 
fortunate eclat must be, but he is perswaded that the malice of 
his enemies on this occasion must turn against themselves when 
the true state of the question is known." ;<>/ * 

Fellow coppys of the letters. 



246 REGISTER OK LETTERS. 

I. (Copie.) 

" De Rome ce 9 Novembre 1725. 

" Votre conduite envers moy, les menaces qui m'ont etc faites, 
et 1'outrage publique de votre retraite dans un couvent, ne me 
touchent pas tant que le malheur et la honte auxquelles vous allez 
vous exposer par une si etrange demarche. Je sens le tout, il est 
vray, comme je dois; mais jusqu'a present je n'ai aucun resenti- 
ment centre vous, car je suis a chaque moment plus couvaincu 
que la malice et la finesse de nos enemis en out imposee a votre 
jeunesse et a la foiblesse de votre sexe. 

" Vous avez du etre persuadee il y a long terns que je veux 
etre le maitre dans mes Affaires et dans ma famille ; mais il n'est 
encore trop tard de se reconnoitre. Rendez vous done a la raison, 
au devoir, a vousmeme et a moy, qui n 'attend que vos soumis- 
sions a bras ouverts, pour vous rendre la parx et le bonheur au- 
tant que depend de moy. 

"Que si, malgre ces derniers efforts de ma tendresse, vous 
persistez dans la resolution dont vous m'avez menacee, il me se- 
roit toujours une consolation de songer que je n'ai rien neglige 
pour vous en empecher. 

" Je vous conjure encore une fois, ma chere Clementine, d'y 

penser serieusement. 

Signe JACQUES R. 

II. 

" De Rome ce H Novembre 1725. 

" Je suis bien aise, Madame, que vous ayez pris le parti de 
m'escrire en cette occasion, puisque par la j'ai celle de vous ex- 
pliquer amplemeht mes sentiments de la meme maniere, voulant 
eviter de le faire de bouche, apres avoir connii par une longue 
experienceique vous etiez tellement, prevenue contre tout ce qui 
venoit de moy, que vous nepoiiviez m'ecouter avec patience. Je 
crains meme que mes sentiments ne vous ont pas ete bien ni 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

clairement expliques, et je veux crpire que vous n'avez nullement 
authorise la manierepeil respectueuse et decente ayec laquelle 
on a traite avec rnoy sur ces sujets. 

" II est certain, Madame, je vous ai toujpnrs uniquement aime, 
et que je n'ai janiais rien desire davantage que de vous complaire 
en tout, sauve toujours la raisou, mon honneur, et le bien de, 
mes alia ires. 

" Je ne scay que trop que nous avons spuvent essuiez des in.-, 
quietudes et des peines, mais aussi je les aurois spufiert de ma 
part avec plus de tranquilite, si je n'avois veil qu'elles etoient 
moins causees par la vivacite de votr,e temperament, que par 
votre trop grande facilite a ecouter de petites plaintes et insinua- 
tions, et en vous croyant offensee dans les personnes de ceux qui 
vous les portoient ; et vous ne pouvez que vous souvenir avec 
quelle patience j'ai souffert vos bouderies depuis plus de deux ans, 
et que dans le terns ou vous vouliez a, peiue me parler ou me re- 
garder, je n'ai pris autre parti que celui du silence. 

" J'espere que vous ferez reflexion que non seullement vous 
avez toujours possedee mon atfection sans partage ou rivalle, 
mais que autant que ma situatio,n et mpn etat m'ont permise, 
je n'ai rien neglige qui put contribuer a votre satisfaction. En 
matiere de depense je ne vous ai janiais linjite; Vous etiez la mai- 
tresse d'aller ou vous voulug ; Vpug avez veil qui bon vous 
sembloit, et vous avez egcrite et receue des lettres sans cou- 
trainte ; et vous scavez de plus que loin d'encourager votre vie 
solitaire et retiree, j'ai ia.it de mon mieux pour vous engager a 
prendre plus d'amusement, ce qui auroit encore contribue au 
mien ; mais apres cela en tout et partout je vous ai laisse une en- 
tiere liberte de suivre votre propre g-out et inclination, me reser- 
vant uniquement d'etre le maitre de rna tmnille et de mes affaires. 

" Je ne scaurois, Madame, revenir de restonnement t)u ai'a 
mis 1'idee injuste et extravagante que 1'on vous a iuspkec contre 
Milord et Madame Inverness, puisque ni vous ni aucune autr 



218 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

personne ne m'ont jamais dit un seul fait sur lequel elle pouvoit 
etre fondec, et je me crois oblige de declarer qne Milord Inver- 
ness loin de vous avoir rendu de mauvaises offices aupres de moy 
(ce que personne jusqu'icy n'a eii la hardiesse de faire) s'etoit 
principallement attache a profiter de la liberte qne je luy donne 
de me parler avec franchise, pOur m'exhorter a la patience et a 
la douceur, quand il voyoit qne je n'etois pas entierement content 
de vous ; et pour ce qui est de la Comtesse, et vous et tout le 
inonde a veil avec quel zele et meme affection elle vous a servie 
pendant plusieures annees ; et jusqu'a cette heure ni 1'un ni 1'autre 
ne scavent en quoy elle auroit pii manquer au respect qui vous 
est due, ce qui auroit etc en manquer a moymeme. 

" Vous ne pouvez oublier qu'il y a trois ans que voyant Milord 
Inverness vous etoit desagreable, quoiquc je ne pouvois penetrer 
ni comment ni pourquoy, je lui ostai a so. priere, uniquement 
pour vous complaire, le detail de la maison, de sorte que depuis. 
ce terns la, il ne luy a pas ete possible de vous dormer aucun su^ 
jet de plainte ; et depuis ce meme terns, sa femme ne vous a ap- 
prochee que quand vous 1'avez demandee ; tellement que les pre- 
ventions ou vous etes apresent sur leur chapitre est la chose du 
monde la plus inconcevable. 

" J'etois certainement incapable de vous conseiller aucune 
bassesse ; mais ce n'est pas avoir une veritable idee de la gran- 
deur que de croire qu'elle puisse etre blessee par une maniere ou 
une parolle gracieuse envers des personnes qui pourroient etre 
choquees de quelque petit mouvement d'impatience ou de colere. 

" Tel etant 1'etat des choses, je n'a pit qu'etre egallement sur- 
pris et offense, lorsque 1'on m'a annonce une menace, que si je 
ne chassois un ministre capable, fidel et laborieux, que vous 
iriez dans un couvent ; car quand meme j'aurois ete dispose a 
mettre une autre a sa place, apres une pai - eille demarche mon 
honneur se trouveroit engage a le continuer ; mais sans avoir rer 
cours a ce motif dans les circonstances presentes, je ne pourrois 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 249 

le deplacer sans miner mes interets et raettre la derniere confu- 
sion dans mes affaires. Cependant ennuye et afflige d'etre con- 
tinuellement en butte a votre injuste colere, comme il a ete de- 
puis si long terns a celle de mes ennemis, il a demande son conge, 
et rien inoins que mes ordres positifs le retient aupres de moy. 
Voyez, Madame, les embaras ou vous me metlez, et qui est 
1'honnette homme qui ne craindra de me servir apres les scenes 
que vous donnez an monde ; et ne vous etonnez pas si je m'at- 
tend que vous me temoigniez votre douleur pour le pett de respect 
que vous m'avez montre et pour 1'injure que vous avez faite et a 
vous meme et a moy par un eclat aussi inoui, et qu'apres cela 
vous m'ouvriez votre co3ur sans reserve; moyennant quoy j'ou- 
blierai le passe et ne songerai a 1'avenir qu'a vous rendre con- 
ten te et heureuse. 

" Pour ce qui est de votre fils aine, il est vray que j'ai donne 
un ordre general que son gouverneur et sous gouverneur ne le 
quitteront jamais d'un pas, et en effet ils entrent toujours avec Iny 
dans ma chambre, quoiqu'ils ne 1'ont pas toujours fait chez vous 
quand vous etiez a vous habiller. La raison de cette ordre etoit 
principallement pour empecher qu'il ne s'echapat seul parmi les 
domestiques, ou les enfans n'apprennent rien de bon, et je n'ai 
jamais imagine que vous en eussiez pii etre offensee et le prendre 
d'une telle maniere ; mais puisque vous en faites une matiere de 
consequence, certainement il n'est pas mon intention de vous 
empecher de voir 1'enfant seul quand vous le voudriez. 

" A 1'egard de Mademoiselle Sheldon, il y a du terns qu'elle a 
demande son conge, et je n'ai pas ete trop content d'elle depuis. 
J'ai eu mes raisons pour Peloigner, et cela ne doit pas vous of- 
fenser, etant le maitre de ma famille et de mes enfans ; mais tout 
le monde aura pii remarquer que vos exces d'inquietude n'ont 
commences et ne sont arrives au comble, que depuis que j'ai oste 
mon fils de ses mains, et de celles des femmes, quoique vous ne 
m'ayiez jamais rien dit contre les personnes a qui je 1'ai confie et 

VOL. II. 2 K 



250 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

pour lesquels je scavois que vous aviez d'estime, particulierement 
pour celuy qui avoit traitle et conclu notre marriage. 

" Je vous proteste, Madame, que je ne connois aucun juste 
sujet que vous avez de vous plaindre de moy, car si je le scavois, 
certainement j'y remedierois ; et je suis persuade que si vous vous 
donnez le loisir de reflechir sans prevention, vous serez touchee 
de tout ce que je viens a vous escrire, et de la douceur et de la 
bonte de ma conduitte envers vous, que vous vous repentirez du 
passe, et que vous ne pousserez pas les choses a 1'extremite, ce 
qu'a la verite vous ne pouvez faire sans vous precipiter dans un 
dernier malheur et sans en etre responsable devant Dieu et de- 
vant les hommes. 

" Je suis etonne et mortifie que vous ayez prise une si impor- 
tante resolution sans la participation du prince votre pere; car 
je suis persuade qu'il auroit fait son possible pour vous calmer, 
et pour, vous empecher de suivre le conseil de ceux qui ne 
craignent pas de sacrifier votre reputation et votre repos a des 
veiies et considerations personelles ou mauvaises. 

" Voicy, ma chere Clementine, tout ce que je puis dire sur ce 
triste et deplorable sujet ; Faites en, je vous conjure, la matiere 
d'une profonde meditation ; songez qu'il est glorieux d'avouer 
son erreur, et que ce n'est qu'en le corrigeant que vous pouvez 
vous rend re heureuse ; et ne resistez plus aux derniers efforts de 
ma tendresse qui n'attend que votre retour pour se reveiller et ne 
jatnais plus rallentir ou finir. 

" Signe JACQUES R." 

i'..-: ' 

17 November 1725. 

" Notwithstanding the Kings wise and prudent endeavours to 
prevent the Queen's executing the extraordinary resolution men- 
lion'd in the above memoire, Her Majesty, on Thursday morning 
the fifteenth current, gei ng abroad as usual in the King's coaches, 
orderd them to go to the convent of Saint Cecilia, into which she 

. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 251 

retired, without sending any answer or taking the least notice 
of the letter the King had written to heron the eleventh." 

Tho the packet with the aforsaid letter and memoire was late 
in coming to my hands, (for want of a safe occasion of sending 
it from Holland toScotland) coppys their of were printed and pub- 
lickly sold at London and other places severall weeks before, for 
it seems, it was the draught of a generall letter calculated to be 
sent to other places over Europe, with a veiw of giving ane uni- 
form authentick information of the affair, to the Kings freinds in 
all places, who generally did not approve of this method of pro- 
paling it ; and it wond appear his enimys did not think it for his 
service, otherwise it woud not have been so industriouslie pub- 
lishd and dispersed in print : All agreed in taking exception at 
that part of the letter wher it is calld a foolish affair : such a 
term given to a matter of such vast importance, inclined people 
to think the author of the letter was not equally sensible therof, 
and that ther was consequently greater reason to belive he might 
be guilty of what was laid to his charge, and the King byassd 
in his favours. 

Letter* from Lord Inverness, 

" November 24, 17*5. 

" Sir, Last post I was obliged to change my method of writing 
to you, it being impossible for me to send you what I then enclosed 
in any other form-f, and it being necessary that you shoud be in- 
formed, as soon as possible, of the true state of the matter, which 
the King is perfectlie easie about, since he sees plainly that the 
Queen has been artfully drawen into this step and made subser- 



* Received 30 Aprile 1726. 

+ The former letter with the memoir was not writ in cypher, but enclosed 
within another letter from Lord Inverness (under a borrowd name) pretending 
to send it as a coppy of what was handed about at Rome. 



UEGIbTKIl OF LETTERS. 

vient to a project of Mars, which has been laid these several! 
years, as must appear plain to those who took the trouble to read 
a long letter* which Mar wrot to Balmerinoch last year. A Pro- 
testant being put about the Prince has been made great use of 
on this occasion to enflame the people of this country, tho I am 
perswaded it will be to no purpose, and that that article will ra- 
ther prove of advantage than dissadvantage to the King elsewher. 
I doubt not but the Queen will soon be sensible of the snare she 
has been led into and condemn the instrument of it, by taking 
the proper measures to reconcile the King to her again, which 
is what all the Kings good subjects must wish for, and which 
cannot but happen when she finds that her own relations dissap- 
prove her conduct, as their ministers here have done alreadie. 

" I am now to acknowledge your letter to the King, of the 2d 
of September, and to assure you of the satisfaction I had of re- 
ceiving one from you of the same date. It is a great satisfaction 
to the King to know the good turn his affairs have taken at home 
and to be able to inform you that negotiations abroad look well. 
The true state of the dissarming of the Highlanders hath been 
represented at proper places, and what the English Goverment 
may say to the contrary will meet with no credit. The affairs 
of Europe have takn a quite different turn, and I hope no diss- 
advantageous one for the Kings interest, since the disarming was 
first proposed ; and since that time, by the accounts you send, the 
situation of Scotland seems likewise to be pritty much altered, 
which the account the Duke of Hamilton gave you of the west 
of Scotland plainly shews, and perhaps the inactivity you men- 
tion in some and the want of application in others of the Kings 
freinds may rather be ane advantage than otherwayes, while the 
King has so faithfull a servant as you to watch over what may 

* Meaning the narrative or ane other letter which I mentioned in mine of 
the 8th of April and 24 of May to Inverness and the King. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 253 

be necessary; Kincardines application on this occasion adds 
very much to the Kings assurance that nothing will be neglected 
wher wholsome and prudent advice takes place. 

" In all events, and that the King may be prepared by the best 
advice that you can send him from your parts, it will be of ad- 
vantage to him, if you inform him of the proper place for a land- 
ing, in the different suppositions of his being able to send over 
into Scotland either 1, 2, or 3000 men, reckoning alwayes that 
a sufficient number is at the same time to be sent into England. 
I shall expect your answer to this as soon as you have ane op- 
portunity. 

" You have not mentioned any thing furder of Captain Frazer, 
and I belive it is better that wee shoud not seek new methods, 
since the tract wee are in is secure. 

" Do me the favour as to return my kind compliments to Kin- 
cardine. I did not think it prudent to make your compliments 
to the gentlemen you desired, for I dont care that any shoud 
know of our corrispondence, for the more private it is, the more 
usefull it will be to the King ; and wee have so many spys here 
about us that the least indiscretion does prejudice. My kind 
compliments pray to your son. I am yours." 

Letter from the King. 

" December 8, 1725. 

" I refer you to what Inverness has formerlie writ to you on 
the subject of the Queen, which tho it be a matter that very 
much interests my subjects and that in the beginning must have 
had a bad appearance, yet now I am perswaded that those who 
have endeavoured to turn this affair to my dissad vantage shall 
find themselves mistaken, and that I shall draw benifite from it. 
The Queen continues still in the convent without giving me any 
mark ol repentance or submission. The Court of Rome at first 
saw clearlie the unreasonableness of the Queens insisting on In- 
vernesses removall, but they are now endeavouring to remove 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

James Murray from my son. The Pope sent to tell me that if he 
were removed and Mrs. Sheldon takn back into favour, that he 
hoped matters might be made up betwixt the Queen and me ; 
that what he said of Mrs. Sheldon was only by way of entreaty, 
but as for Murray, that he coud not approve or concent to his 
being about my son. To which I replyd that I had no occasion 
for the Popes advice or concent in ane affair which concernd ray 
private family. It has been talkd in Rome as if the Pope might 
take from me the pension he gives me, but neither threats of this 
kind, nor any want of regard the Pope may shew me, will in- 
duce me to alter my conduct, and will only serve to afford me 
ane opportunity of shewing my subjects that nothing can make 
me alter a conduct which I think right and just. My childeren 
and I are in good health, and my constant kindness doth ever 
attend you." 

Tho this last letter is of a date prior to the succeeding, it came 
not to my hands forseverall weeks therafter, the ship having been 
drove into Norway, and as it containd nothing that required ane 
answer, I have inserted it as it shoud have come. 

Letter* from Lord Inverness. 

" January 19, 1720. 

" Sir, I shant repeat any thing that youl find in the inclosed, 
therfore I have litle to say in answer to yours of the 13 October, 
the King approving very much of the conduct you propose to 
keep with relation to Mar ; and on the information you give me 
of the conversation past twixt you and Mr. Seymour, I shall only 
remark that Mars conduct seems to be very different from Mr. 
Seymours to suppress all noise of any difference amongst the 
Kings freinds abroad, for Mar is leaving no stone unturnd that 
he thinks can contribute to creat divisions, which will only tend 
to make those who wish the Kings cause may flourish, to stick 

* Received 1O March 1726. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. . 255 

the closer togather : and as to the narrative, it was necessary to 
put a stop to Mars undermining the Kings affairs, by shewing 
some of his servants the wayes that he was taking to get at his 
ends by aspersing privately those who had the honour to serve 
the King, and throwing dirt on his cause, and as it tended no- 
wayes to his vindication, coud only be designd to discredit a 
cause he had sacraftced to his private interest. David Nairn was 
wrong in the information he brought, that the Bishop of Rochester 
was out of the Kings favour ; his health does not allow him to 
stir abroad, which, added to some differences he has with bis 
countriemen, wont allow him to be so active as otherwise he 
might be : but the Kings confidence in him is no wayes changed. 
It is true Dunbar and he had some differences togather, bnt 
that nowayes interested the Kings affairs, and what was repre- 
sented to you on that head must certainly have proceeded from 
some of the Kings secret malitious enimys, as you judge it did, 
for he has the misfortune to have severall of those who lye in 
wait and are readie to improve every circumstance they can lay 
hold on to the dissadvantage of the common interest. God grant 
the King may soon have ane opportunity of profiting of the good 
disposition our country is in. 

" I made your compliments to Dunbar as you desired : when 
he left Rome last, it was with a resolution not to write any thing, 
either to Scotland or England, of the reasons that were givn then 
for his removall, and ever since he has continued the same con- 
duct and has corresponded with no body, otherwayes you might 
be assured that his former freindshrp with you woud not allow 
his being so long silent : he desires youl accept of his humble 
service, and thanks you for the compliments you make him on 
his late charge, which tho in its self very agreeable yet has pro- 
duced a good deal of uneasiness both to him and me, and I may 
say more to the King than either of us. Wee are now persecuted 
in matters of religion, and instances are made to make us give 



256 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

over our prayers in the family, as wee have practiced them ever 
since the King has been in Rome; but he has declared possitively 
that he will not forbid them, and I have told the Popes secretary 
(after using all the arguments I coud to disswade him from en- 
tering into that affair, as to which he is convinced the Pope is in 
the wrong) that nevertheless if the Pope insist on it, wee will of 
ourselves desist, providing he give it me in writing that he will 
positively have it so, which I find they do not care to do, least it 
might be brought as ane example and applyd to the Papists at 
home and give a pretence to the putting the laws in execution 
against them. Here the matter stands, and perhaps on this ac- 
count they may be prevaild upon not to give us any more trouble. 
However th,at be, those who put this matter in the Popes mind, 
on purpose, I suppose, to draw out of it some prejudice to the 
King, shall find themselves mistaken, for he by his conduct in this 
as well as in other matters, will find no difficultie in fencing 
against those wicked designs. 

" On the last day of the last year the King was pleased to 
make a promotion of the St. Andrew in favour of Marishall, 
Nithsdale, Dunbar and my self. I am yours." 

Letter* from the King. 

"January 19,1726. 

" I have received your letter of the 13 of October, and have 
litle to say in answer to it. Cameron is not yet come over that 
I hear of, so that I cannot judge of the proposall you made to 
him for my interest, not being informed of it. 

" I am now indifferent about receiving a full coppy of the nar- 
rative : The author of it has made me forget that particular, by 
setting on footing matters of another nature, of which you have 
been alreadie informed. The Queen is still in the convent, and 
her advisers continue still, under a false pretence of religion, to 

* Received 10 March 1726. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 257 

procure my uneasiness from the Pope to such a degree that I 
wish my self out of his country, and I wont fail to do my endea- 
vours to be able to leave it, which line perswaded will tend to 
the advantage of my affairs. I pity the Queens situation with 
all my heart, and wish she soon may give me ane opportunity of 
shewing her how much preferable my love and tenderness for her 
ought to be to the advice of her pernicious councellours. 

" I expect with impatience your answer to a letter writ to 
you sometime ago about politick affairs, which is all I shall say 
at present but that my sincere kindness shall ever attend you." 

Letter to the King. 

"March 12, 1726. 

" Sir, I had givn you the trouble of so many letters commit- 
ted to the care of Mr. Cameron, and in the enclosed writ so fully 
to Lord Inverness in return to his of the 1 7 and 24 of November, 
that I did not think it necessary to say any thing particularly to 
yourself at this time, but having, about ane hour or two after I 
had finished the enclosed to Inverness, received the honour of 
' yours and his of the 19 of January, I judgd it proper by this to 
acquaint you therof. What I have wrot to you and him by Ca- 
meron and at this time will I hope answer what you required and 
expected with respect to those points wherin you demanded the 
opinions of your freinds here, and I pray God you may soon have 
ane occasion to put them in execution. 

" I am deeplie affected with the trouble it is easie to perceive 
you are under, from what hath hapned in your family : by the 
enclosed youl see what turn is givn to it, and I cannot but take 
notice that these and the like reports gaind credit (during our 
state of totall ignorance) pritty universally and therby occasiond 
a good many severe reflections on Inverness and Dunbar. Dif- 
ferences twixt man and wife, even in a private family, is so deli- 
cate a point, that a 3d person, without a very particular call and 
immediat concern, cannot well venture to interpose, and much 

VOL. II. 2 L 



258 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

less woud I presume to say any thing on so nice and tender a 
subject, were it not attended with consequences wherin so many 
thousands are affected and doth therby become a publick nationall 
concern. Consider, Sir, I beseech you, the many advantages which 
the enimys of you and your family draw from what has hapned, 
by inventing and propogating many storys which tend to lessen 
your charactar in the world, and which, tho ever so false and 
improbable, are credited by some and at least creat fears and 
doubts in others, and by blasting the hopes of your leaving a 
numerous issue behind you. This very article is of the last con- 
sequence, for it is a truth naturall to imagine and consists with 
my particular knowledge, by the opportunitys I had of convers- 
ing often and knowing the sentiments of my unkle the late Lord 
Wharton and his intimates, that the enimys of your family were 
by nothing more encouraged to drive on and persist in their re- 
belious schemes, than that in you alone existed the royal race of 
Stuart, and were in hopes that with you it woud expire ; wheras 
a numerous issue subsisting is one of the most powrfull argu- 
ments in behalf of your just cause, as it draws alongst with it a 
disputable succession, whilst the present setlement continues, the 
many miserys wherof England has by dear bought experience 
been taught. I acknowledge ther are many whos right is prior 
to that of the German, but your enimys know as a certain truth, 
that the particular regard and attachment to your person and fa- 
mily will produce stronger efforts than in favours of any other 
person and family, tho equally supported by ane hereditary right 
to the crown ; and on these considerations every thing that re- 
tards the hopes and expectations of the encrease of your royall 
offspring is a plain visible prejudice to your just cause, which, 
even for the sake of your faithfull subjects, cannot fail to make a 
due impression on you. A king no doubt has a higher right and 
title to be absolute master of his own particular family, than a 
private person ; but at the same time as his personall cannot be 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 259 

separated from his regall capacity on which such numbers de- 
pend, prudence calls upon him more strongly to cover, and by all 
lawfull and honourable means to repair, such breaches as are na- 
turally attended with irreparable bad effects towards himself and 
his people. Forgive my entering so far upon this melancholy 
subject : it proceeds from no other cause whatsoever than the 
disinterested regard I have for yourself and your family and that 
I am certain these are the sentiments of all that wish you well, 
whose earnest prayers and longing desires are to hear that mat- 
ters are amicably adjusted twixt you and the Queen ; and in 
order therto, Hamilton, Eglinton, Wigtoun and Kincardine have 
had under consideration how far it woud be expedient, shoud 
they write a dutifull letter to Her Majestie, exhorting and be- 
seeching her, in the name and for the sake of her faithfull sub- 
jects, to think of returning to the duty she ows you and being in 
such a state as will admitt of the effects of your passion and re- 
gard for a lady represented here of so great merit and for whom 
all your subjects have so great a respect, as being the mother of 
that offspring, by whom tis hoped wee and ours shall be governd 
whilst the world does last. If this measure is by them persued, 
the letter, tis designd, shall be sent directly to you, to be delivered 
or not as you are pleased to direct. 

" If what I have advanced on this subject is in the least dis- 
pleasing to you, I ask your pardon in the most submissive man- 
ner, being withall hopefull to obtain it, as youl have the good- 
ness to belive tis ane error of judgement rather than any motive 
culpable in Yours." 

Letter to Lord Inverness. 

" March 12, 1726. 

"Sir, Some few days after Mr. Cameron saild from Leith, 
yours of the 17 of November (with a large packet) and another 
of the 24th came to my hands. Cameron will tell you how much 
the Kings freinds were at a loss, by being so long in the dark con- 



260 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

cerning the unluckie breach tvvixt the King and Queen : a thou- 
sand stories were reported with respect to the cause and way and 
manner of it, which the common enimy improved to what they 
thought beneficiall to them, to whom the Kings freinds, particu- 
larly those known to be most trusted by him, coud make no re- 
ply, as they were perfectly ignorant of the story and circumstances 
attending it, except in so far as they collected from the publick 
news papers : tho some indeed were not wanting, who made no 
bonds of affirming that the Queen had received great provoca- 
tions, and in a particular manner, from yourself and some few 
more of your freinds, and in this they gaind universall credit, 
altho others were at pains to suppress such reports, as being a re- 
flection on the Kings judgement and honour to imagine he woud 
suffer it, had the fact been as these gentlemen represented. 

" Long before I received yours, what was therin containd was 
printed and hauked about the streets of London and Edinburgh, 
which seems to have been by order of the G overmen t, for a scur- 
rilous senseless introduction was therto annexed, and the magis- 
trates of Edinburgh compelld the cadis to cry it thorow the streets ; 
and as wee had no intimation from what hands the memoire and 
letters came, this conduct of the Goverment induced many to be- 
liye they were not genuine, so that after receiving of yours I had 
litle left me to do, but let it be known that what they had be- 
fore seen in print, was the account which the King designd to 
impart to his subjects, of that unlucky affair. I cannot express 
how much all who have any concern for the King were affected 
with that breach : they regrated a division in his family and the 
fatall consequences of various kinds attending it with respect to 
his interest at home : they were affraid it might occasion a dry- 
ness twixt the King and the Queens freinds, who can and tis 
hoped in the present conjuncture will be serviceable to him ; but 
since you say their ministers dissapprove of her conduct, wee are 
hopefull their principalls will prevail with her to insist no longer 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 261 

in a measure, that all the world does see is so pernicious to that 
interest in which slie herself, her childeren and so many thou- 
sands of others have so near a concern ; and on the other hand, 
whoever endeavours to prevent a thorow reconciliation on the 
Kings part, has no more pretensions to be reckoned amongst 
the number of his freinds, than those who directlie or indirectlie 
contributed or were accessory any manner of way to the breach, 
whom all judicious persons, that have any regard for the King 
and his interest, do and will esteem his greatest and most dan- 
gerous as being his most malicious enimys. Wee shall never 
here be at ease till wee hear this matter is finally compri- 
mised, and weer surprised that all this time wee have heard 
of nothing more than what past at the very begining. Tis a 
matter of the utmost consequence to the King, as it highlie dis- 
courages his freinds: this I know assuredlie, both from those 
who make ane open profession of their zeall for him, and others 
who appear outwardly with another countenance but secretlie 
wish for ane occasion to pull of the mask in his service, and ther- 
fore it is fit they shoud be duely apprized how this matter is likely 
to terminate : line sure Ive been askd the question a thousand 
times, and being able to give no satisfaction was a great dissap- 
pointrnent. 

" By what I wrot formerlie to the King himself (tho then wee 
were altogather in the dark) if he has communicated the con- 
tents to you, and by what I have said in this, you may see that 
the blame is in a great measure laid on you : forgive my using 
the freedom plainly to tell you so : It is consistent with the rules 
I have laid doun of acquainting the King or his ministers, fail-lie 
and without fear or favour, of every thing that I think for his ser- 
vice to know, and I presume after due reflection you will think it 
na disservice done yourself, since by knowing whats laid to your 
charge, you may have ane opportunity of vindicating yourself, 
and at the same time of doing justice to our common master. I 



263 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

thank God for it I never was, and I belive I never will be of any 
partie: whatever person the King thinks fit to employ at the head 
of his affairs, him will I honour, his directions follow, and do him 
all the services within the narrow compass of my powr ; and 
from these principles it is, that I write so freelie on this subject, 
which I perswade my self youl take as well as it is designd, and 
make a right use of it. 

" I come now to some other points of your last letter to which 
you demand a particular answer, tho what I have represented in 
some former letters might suffice. If, as you lay down, a suffi- 
cient force be sent to England, tis a matter of less consequence 
wher the landing place be in Scotland : however to be somewhat 
more particular with respect to your severall suppositions, If the 
armament for Scotland consist of 1000 men, then I conceive some 
such place for landing must be chosen as will allow of ane easie 
and speedy conjunction with the Highlanders, without whom 
such a body will not be able to make head against the regular 
troops now here. And in case it consist of 2000 men, it woud 
be so contrived that they might have it in their power to join the 
Highlanders in case it were found necessary, and with this veiw 
I reckon the Firth of Clide (wher are the ports of Irvine, Green- 
ock, Newport, Glasgow, &c. any of which may be chosen as 
seems most expedient at the time) a proper situation. The ad- 
jacent countrie, if right measures with respect to the Union arid 
a Scots Parliament, as I mentiond in a former letter to the King, 
be followd, will I belive be found favourably inclined, and from 
Glasgow that number can force their way into the Highlands or 
wait there till the clans force their way to them, if so be a speedie 
conjunction is found necessary: how far a landing in the western 
coasts will corrispond with the place of embarkation, wee here 
cant pretend to judge, as wee know nothing of that particular. 
But if their come 3000 men, the Firths of Forth or Clide are 
equally convenient, as tis ane easie march to the capitall and seat 



REGISTER OP LETTERS, 263 

of Goverment ; for I reckon that body of men, with those that 
will quicklie join, especially if the Highlanders get ont at the 
same time and follow on the heels of the troops quarterd in the 
north, if they move southwards, will be a sufficient force against 
any opposition can be dreaded in this country, unless England 
be entirely abandoned and all the troops sent to Scotland, which 
I wish may happen, as it woud render the game very sure there. 
On this subject I must caution you to neglect no means of ti- 
mouslie preparing the Highlanders for such ane affair, for much 
depends on them and their earlie appearance. Cameron will, 
I belive very justly, give a fair representation of these peoples at- 
tachment to the King ; but as it is naturall for mankind to men- 
tion their own countriemen with some favour, tis to be supposed 
he'l set the affairs of that country in the best light he can, and 
which perhaps will hold good ; But at the same time I think my 
self bound to tell you, that I can on very good grounds assure 
you, these people, tho perfectly well affected to the King, will 
act with more caution than formerlie. Theyr a cunning subtle 
race, and will not move till they be well assured of being sup- 
jKjrted, and it will require a good deall of prudence and address 
to satisfye them in this necessary article, so as they may resolve 
and prepare for it and not run the hazard of discovering the de- 
sign too soon. This I judged proper to mention, as being a mat- 
ter that deserves to be maturely considered and prudentlie deter- 
mined and executed. 

" The questions that have of late been put to us about the 
choise of a generall, landing places, &c., give us great hopes that 
something for our releif is on the anvill, which was never more 
wanted and woud never I belive be more joyfully received. 

" It often happens that the want of ships going to Holland oc- 
casions a delay in transmitting letters from hence, which might 
in a great measure be supplyd, if Robert Gordon or some such 
person at Burdeaux was directed to receive and coud safely and 



264 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

conveniently forward letters to you. You can best judge how 
far this is practicable and accordingly give directions in it. . 

"I made no further mention of Captain Frazer to you, because 
in one of your former letters you mentiond the Kings good opi- 
nion of him, and that you wanted only a safe canal of conveying 
a cypher to him. 

" About a 4th night after Cameron left us, a gentleman (with 
a very good intention I belive) came and with great concern told 
me that Cameron had betrayd the King, at least acted a part 
quite different from what was intended by his journey, having 
been gaind by Mar at Paris and accordingly used his endeavours 
to support that Dukes personall interest in the Highlands, and 
even attempted (but without success) to procure ane address in 
his favours : I replyd that I did not belive one word of it, for al- 
tho I .shoud suppose Cameron might be capable of such ane ac- 
tion, I was sure he was not such a fool as to attempt it at this 
juncture : However I have been at some pains to trace the story 
back, and Ime far mistaken if it had not its rise from a certain 
person* whose private affairs have obligd him to retire from 
Edinburgh to the Highlands, and who is strongly attachd to Mar 
and devised this story to sow a jealousie amongst those that have 
no dependance that way. I mention this particular, that you 
may give no credite to it, if so be youve accounts of it from o,ther 
hands, it being probable that it 'may be whispered about in other 
countries as well as this. 

" I have sufficient authority to assure you that Seaforth gave 
no directions to his followers last summer, but what were con- 
sistent with his duty to the King; he orderd them to have no re- 
gard to his own personall interest in competition with that of the 
elan in generall, but withall to preserve their arms so as to be in 
a condition to serve the King when he required: and I know his 

* Meaning Colen M c kenzie, goldsmith in Edinburgh. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 265 

people exactlie followd the directions they got from hence upon 
my receiving the Kings letter dated 23d of June last: so that by 
all I can learn theirs no reason to have any suspicion of Seaforth. 

" You'r much in the right to be very cautious in letting any 
know with whom you corrispond, and I must recommend the 
same in communicating what intelligences are sent, for it is a 
great discouragement to find what is transmitted shoud be re- 
turnd back here, as has to my great surprize hapned not long 
ago. 

" Nothing since my last has occurrd to be communicated to 
you. I beg leave to tender my duty in the most respectfull man- 
ner to the King, and that youl belive I am Yours." 

Whilst wee must wait some time for answers to these letters, 
it will not be male propos to insert a letter printed in the news 
papers as from the Queen to her sister the . line 

assured tis genuine, and if so, it will at least serve to shew the 
Queens sentiments and what she and her freinds did incline the 
world shoud belive was the occasion of her retirement : Tis pro- 
bable that the aforsaid memoire and letters dispersed by the 
Kings orders gave rise to this of the Queens, which met gene- 
rally with credit. 

" Dear Sister, I received yours of the 3d of November ; I was 
so much in hast when I wrote to you last, that I had not time to 
inform you of a peice of news which I doubt not has very much 
surprised you. Mr. Hay and his lady are the cause that I am re- 
tired into a convent. I received your letter in their behalf, and 
returnd you ane answer, only to do you a pleasure and to oblige 
the King, but it all has been to no purpose, for instead of ma- 
king them my freinds, all the civilitys I have shown them have 
only served to render them the more insolent. Their unworthy 
treatment of me has in short reduced me to such ane extremity, 
and I arn in such a cruell situation, that I had rather suffer death 
than live in the Kings palace with persons that have no religion, 

VOL. IL 2 M 



266 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

honour, nor conscience, and who, not content with having been* 
the authors of so fatall a separation betwixt the King- and me, 
are continually teazing him every day to part with his best 
freinds and his most faithfull subjects. This at length determined 
me to retire into a convent, there to spend the rest of my dayes 
in lamenting my misfortunes, after having been fretted for six 
years togather by the most mortifying indignitys and affronts that 
can be imagined. I desire you to make my compliments to the 
Bishop of Ambrun, and to tell him from me that as I take him 
to be my freind I doubt not but he will do me justice on this oc- 
casion : He is very sensible that they were strong and pressing 
reasons that determined me to take so strange a resolution, and 
he has been a witness of the retired life I alwayes led: And you, 
my dear sister, ought to have the same charity for me. But what- 
ever happens, I assure you that I shoud rather chuse to be silent 
under censure, than to offer at the least thing which may pre- 
judice either the person or affairs of the King, for whom I al- 
wayes had, notwithstanding my unhappy situation, and for 
whom I shall retain as long as I live, a sincere and respectfull af- 
fection." 

Letter from the King.* 

"February 2d, 1726. 

" The confidence I have in you and the prospect of my affairs 
abroad taking a right turn wont allow of my delaying to inform 
you that I have had for some time reason to hope the best from 
my applications to the Court of Vienna, wher I find the Emperors 
interest as well as his inclinations may soon lead him to espouse 
my restoration in a very particular manner. Youl allow tis no 
easie matter to perswade a forreign prince, who is not thorowlie 
acquainted with the dispositions of my people, of the facilitys he 
woud find in succeeding in ane attempt for.my restoration; ther- 

* Received 2d Aprile, 1726. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 267 

fore I proposed to the Emperor to send a minister privately to 
England, to take information there of the good disposition of my 
subjects, and I having reason to belive that he will send one 
soon, and it being necessary that that minister shoud return well 
instructed as to the loyaltie and abilitys of my Scots as well as 
my English subjects in case of ane invasion, I hope, if your cir- 
cumstances will allow, you wont grudge the trouble of a journey 
to London for that effect. 

" I have no method of writing to the Duke of Hamilton with 
safety, therfore I desire you woud communicate to him the con- 
tents of this letter, which tho short is of the .greatest importance, 
^ince if such a minister comes, all will depend upon the informa- 
tion he will carry back: It is therfore that I propose to Hamilton 
to make that journey likewayes; tho as you may belive, this af- 
fair must be managed with the greatest secresie, I must leave it 
to himself to decide in the matter. I woud not have either him 
or you to stirr till you hear from the Earl of Straftbrd, whom I 
have directed to inform you as soon as such a person arrives, 
and if your coming to London be necessary. 

" I wont mix any other subject with this, but referring every 
thing to Hamiltons prudence and yours, and recommending to 
you both the greatest secresie imaginable, I desire youl assure 
him of my particular esteem and be perswadod yourself that my 
kindness shall ever attend you." 

Letter to the King. 

"April 3d, 1726. 

" Sir, Yours of the 2d of February I received yesterday with 
unexpressable joy as it contains some comfortable hopes of seing 
what I have so long and so earnestlie wishd for, and I pray God 
to direct and conduct you and all your freinds, forreign and do- 
mestick, in such a manner that their united endeavours to serve 
you and your just cause may have the desired issue. I never did 
nor will make the least scruple in undertaking any task for youv 



2f>8 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

service, and shall lose no time in performing 1 what yon require of 
me when I am calld upon, and the secresie you recommend shall 
be so unviolably observed that no soul living shall know less or 
more of what is committed to me: for I think I am so fully ap- 
prized of the sentiments of your freinds and evry thing thats to 
be represented with respect either to the inclinations or capacitys 
of your people in this countrie and the methods to be laid down 
and prosecuted, that I stand in no need of any fresh or particular 
instructions from your trustees on this occasion, and consequentlie 
no reason for imparting the secret to any of them except the 
Duke of Hamilton who will keep it, I dare say, with the same 
strictness. My greatest difficultie will be how to contrive a plau- 
sible pretext for the journey, so as to avoid giving suspicion to 
the Goverment, who I know keep a strict eye over me ; and in 
order therto I have directed some of my freinds to talk publickly 
that my wife and I design to go to the Bath, under which cloack 
she and I shall set out as soon as Ime calld for by Lord Strafford. 
The Duke of Hamilton has been at London some 4 or 5 weeks, 
attending the issue of the grand affair twixt him and the Earl of 
Dundonald now depending before the House of Lords, but I know 
of a sure hand going soon to London, with whom I shall write 
fully to His Grace. 

" I hope long ere now what was sent by Cameron will have 
reachd your hands, seing what you may collect from thence and 
from his accounts may be of use to you at this juncture. I have 
nothing of moment to add to my last of the 12th of March, and 
I will not trouble you further at this time but to renew my pro- 
fession, in the most solemn sincere manner, of being with all ima- 
ginable fidelity and zeall Yours." 

Letter to the Duke of Hamilton. 

" April 2d, 1726. 

" Sir, Some time after you went from Scotland I received let- 
ters from the King and Lord Inverness: they containd a further 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 269 

justification of themselves with respect to the state of affairs with 
the Queen, (on which subject I had before and did again write 
fully in the plain honest stile I was directed) and advice was 
asked as to the proper places for landing in Scotland, on the se- 
verall suppositions of 1, 2, or 3000 men being sent thither and 
at the same time a sufficient force to England, to which, with the 
advice and concurrance of Kincardine, I sent distinct answers. 
A few dayes ago I received another letter from the King, upon 
which I sent you by the last post some necessary * instructions 
for reading of this. Before I proceed further be pleased to read 
the enclosed, which is a coppy, word for word, of the last letter 
from the King. 

" As the King in this letter reposes a good deall of confidence 
in you, I doubt nothing of your answering his expectations to a 
title; and this step of his is, I hope; but a preliminary of the trust 
hel lodge in you and the honour hel conferr on you. I have writ 
to him that you was at London, but that I de soon fall on a safe 
way to communicate his pleasure to you. The first thing I 
humblie conceive to be under your consideration is, whither or 
not you shoud speak of this subject to Straftbrd: If I may offer my 
opinion, I think you shoud not; but at the same time give him ane 
opportunity to speak to you of it, if he pleases: for youl observe 
in the Kings letter that it is left to that Lord to call on us or not 
as he thinks proper, and as hes a person of some singularitys in 
his temper, and that wee know not if the King has acquainted 
him of his name being mentiond to us, perhaps he'l not be well 
pleased to find it so, and therfore I do leave his broacliing it 
first to himself. If he intends to follow out the Kings scheme, 
instead of writing to me I doubt not but hel speak to you. As 
for my own part, I shall not decline the journey whensoever I 
am calld upon, but at the same time Ime under great straits to 



* The coppy of a cypher by which I was to write and he read this letter. 






270 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

find out a pretext for it, and tis ten to one but our statesmen 
may suspect something; more than ordinary from it, and set them 
on the search more earnestly ; and therfore since you are (on 
another account) alreadie upon the spot, can give all the informa- 
tions and directions necessary, and does not need me to gain 
greater credite to what you say, I reallie think it will do no good 
and may do harm if I make the journey, and so much I desire 
youd represent to Strafford if so be he enters upon the subject 
with you : but after all if either you or he desire 1 shorn! come up, 
I will on your call perform it at all hazards. I have not nor 
will not communicate this affair to any soul living, for the cau- 
tion of eecresie recommended is, for the publick as well as our 
own sakes, essentially necessary. I am Yours." 

To this letter I have no return, in regard the measure was soon 
dropt and the Duke designd to return quicklie to Scotland. 

Letter to Lord Inverness. 

" Aprile 30, 1726. 

" Sir, Since my last of the 3d instant to the King I have had 
occasion to converse with Earl of Wigtoun and Kincardine and 
severall others of good sense and zeall for him, concerning the 
present state of the Church in this country, who coud not but re- 
grate the very many inconveniencies arising daylie from the Bi- 
shop of Edinburgh his being so faild of late that he has lost his 
memorie and judgement to a great degree, and is troubled with a 
certain infirmity which in all probability will soon end his dayes: 
but the greatest misfortune of all is from the charactars and con- 
duct of the Colledge of Bishops. It consists of a parcell of honest 
enuffmen, but withall of no great reach, and splitt and divided 
into parties and factions, so that nothing is done or to be ex- 
pected from them for the reall interest of the cause; and as they 
are all, especially the best of them, very old and infirm, they must 
drop fast off". The Kings freinds then are of opinion he d have 
in his thoughts whom he d appoint to succeed Fullarton, and that 



REGISTER OF LETTERS* 27 I. 1 

in the mean time he'd immediatlie send his directions to the Col- 
ledge to consecrate Mr. John Gillane a Bishop of the Church of 
Scotland. I have not immediate directions from all his trustees 
in this matter, but it consists with my knowledge that what is 
here proposed with respect to Mr. Gillane will be much appro- 
ved of by Hamilton, Eglinton, Balmerinoch and John Paterson, 
and also by severall of the Bishops who have talked with me on 
this subject. I need not with you enter upon his charactar, you 
know it as well as I can tell you: all I shall say is, his nomina- 
tion by the King will without all doubt be approvd of by all that 
wish well to Church and State, ashes a person of excellent sense 
and learning, and withall has zeall and firmness to go thorow 
with what he thinks for the good of the cause, and his authority 
woud go far towards keeping the rest in due bounds, and ther- 
fore I cannot but recommend to you to lay this matter before the 
King with all the earnestness imaginable, being what is truely 
and reallie necessary for the peace and welfare of that interest 
he has so much at heart; and if he's pleasd to approve of it to 
dispatch the directions as soon as possible, for every day shews 
the want of such a man to direct and influence the rest to act 
prudentlie and calmly. I will not take on me to propose any 
particular person to succeed Fullarton, but were I to give my 
opinion, it is possitively that amongst the whole clergy (bishops 
or presbiters) thers none near so well qualifyed for it as Gillane, 
and I me apt to belive he'l be recommended to the King by his 
freinds. At first it woud appear naturall to advance one of the 
Colledge, but theyr a parcell of either weak or hotheaded men or 
so very infirm that not one of them (now that poor Irvines dead) 
is fit for the post; besides; as so many of them aim at it them- 
selves, the best way to prevent envy woud be to advance a pris- 
biter or one such as Gillane (if he's previouslie consecrated) that 
is not dipt in their caballs. Your being convinced that this ia 






.-. 

REGISTER OF LETTERS. 



for the Kings service will I know be enuff to engage you in it; 
but allow me to tell you as ane additionall motive, that as much 
of Gillanes advancement will be ascribed to you, it will infalibly 
tend to give the Kings and Churches freinds ane opinion of your 
prudence and integrity in the exercise of the trust His Majesty 
reposes in you. 

" Weer told here of the great confidence the King has in the 
Duke of Wharton : I hope he shall answer his expectations, but 
at the same time a great deall of caution is necessary, for hes 
frequently very rash and over-zealous, and in his cups too apt to 
blab out with matters that require the greatest secresie. 

" Weer in hopes of having soon the confirmation of the agree- 
able news of differences being made up betwixt the King and 
Queen. This morning I received the Kings letter of the 8th of 
December last; wher it has lain so long by the way, when others 
of a fresher date came long ere now to my hands, I cant tell : but 
it required no answer, and so tis no great matter. 

" The King will be pleased to know tliat Strathmore has made 
up peace and freindship amongst his neighbours in Angus who 
differed about Bishop Nome; some of the clergy still stand out, 
but I reckon they will now soon submitt likewise. I have no- 
thing of consequence more than is containd in my last to the 
King, so for the present I take my leave of you by assuring you 
that I am Yours." 

The following, which was a cover to those that are therin men- 
tiond, was signd by the King himself with his cypher name: 
the first part therof was not writ in cypher, (but contrived as if 
writ by a 3d person who sent the enclosed letters to satisfye hjs 
freinds curiousity) because the therin 'enclosed letter from the 
King was likewise not writ in cyphers, being a letter calculated, 
and accordingly sent to most courts and places, for the Kings 
further vindication, as I was since informed, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 273 

(i March 2d, 1726.* 

" I have procured coppys of 2 letters writ by the Pretender, 
one to his wife and another to a freind of his, which I reckon 
youl be glad to see, since you converse sometimes with people 
who are desirous to be informed of what passes in that family. 

1 wrot to you sometime ago that your presence at London 

might happen to be of great use. The person I then mentiond 
I was desirous you shoud meet with there hath put off his journey 
for some time, and perhaps it may uot be at all thought neces- 
sary, so I woud not have either Duke of Hamilton or you think 
of stirring till you hear further of the matter. I am yours." 

Coppy of the Kings letter to 

" March 2d 1726. 

" I had lately sent me, from a subject of mine whom I very 
much esteem and who is no less esteemed by my freinds at home, 
some propositions made to me in relation to the Queen's reconci- 
liation with me : it was represented as necessary to give her some 
sort of satisfaction, and for that end it was proposed that the Duke 
of Ormond shoud be made governor to the prince my son in Lord 
Dunbars room, and that Lady Inverness should go out of the 
house till the Queen recalld her, it being at the same time lookd 
upon as essentiall for my service that Lord Inverness shoud con- 
tinue in his place. I was glad of ane opportunity to engadge 
the Queen to open her heart freelie to me, but as she had alreadie 
refused to hear Cardinall Gualterio, tho charged with a general 
compliment from the Queen of France in return to a letter the 
Queen had writ to her on her retreat, I desired the Princess Piom- 
bino, who went frequently to see the Queen in the convent and 
for whom the Queen expressd a particular regard these many 
years, to ask the Queen from me what was her opinion of &e 
proposalls of reconciliation sent to me (which proposalls I knew 

* Received 10 May 1726. 
VOL. II. 2 N 



274 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

were also sent to her) and if ther was any thing in them accep- 
table to her. The Queen told Princess Piombino that she had 
then the head ach and coud not enter into these matters, but the 
next day she wrot her word that she was much surprized at the 
message she brought her the day before, and that if she did 
not know her she woud have thought she had been imposing 
on her ; adding severall obscure expressions by which, without 
mentioning the memoriall or the name of any particular per- 
son, it appeard to me that the propositions therin mentioned 
were not agreeable to her ; and as a further mark of it, the next 
time the Princess came to see her, she desired her to medle no 
more in these matters, and it seemd the Queen doubted if the 
propositions made to her were authentick : It behoved no doubt 
her advisers to perswade her they were not, since by them it was 
visible how far Lord Inverness was from being disagreeable to 
my English freinds, as she had been made belive. Nevertheless 
to leave nothing undone that was any wayes reasonable and de- 
cent for me to do to enlighten and reclaim the Queen, I writ her 
a letter, of which you have here a coppy, and sent Foster to de- 
liver it to her; she told him she had the headach and woud an- 
swer it as soon as she coud, and 2 dayes after, I received a very 
long letter from her, which tho writ all in her hand, I can plainly 
discover to be in Cardinal Alberoni's stile, and it is contrived in 
terms no wayes becoming either a wife or a Queen : she takes 
no notice of the memoriall, but rails extremely against Lord In- 
verness, without accusing him of any particular fact or giving 
any reason ; she declares she will not come back to me as long 
as ces gens la are about me, without naming Lady Inverness, 
but leaving the door open to include or exclude Lord Dunbar by 
that expression, as she shall think fit afterwards. By the whole 
strain of her letter I see very plainly that if I yeild to her, I must 
expect to receive the law from her, and according to her way 
of thinking not keep a Protestant about my person, since in 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 27i> 

answer to what I say of Lord Invernesses fidelity, she puts me 
the question, Sil esl infidel a Dieu sera t iljidel a son maitre ? 
so that as long as the Queen continues in these sentiments, ther 
is no hopes of a reconciliation, and as litle appearance of her 
altering her maxims, as long as she is in the hands of those who 
now govern her and who neglect nothing to keep at a distance 
from her, whoever coud open her eyes and show her her duty. 
I have been the more particular on these matters to put them once 
for all in their true light to you and freinds with you ; for my 
own part, I have taken my party, and tho I shall be alwayes 
readie to forgive the Queen when ever she will live with me as a 
wife ought to do, yet I woud not purchase even my restoration 
at the price of being her slave ; and therfore in this situation I 
doubt not but those who are sincerely attached to me and the 
good cause, will show me they are so by their behaviour. It is 
a great satisfaction to me to have left nothing undone that coud 
depend on me to heal this breach, but as matters stand, I have 
nothing left to do but lay aside all passion and resentment and 
be readie to receive the Queen's submissions when shes inclined 
to make them and retract in some shape or other those lybells to 
which she hath lent both her hand and name, tho they are plainly 
dictated by Cardinall Alberoni, who was tother day six hours 
and a half at the convent of St. Cecilia ; till then I cannot in 
honour nor upon any account see the Queens face, and in the 
mean time I am not so blind as not to see the meaning of the 
Queens whole conduct, in all its extent and in all its conse- 
quences : it is such as will engadge me to mention her no more, 
and I shall content myself with remembering what I am and 
what I ought to be, which will not be forgot on this occasion by 
those who know the duty of a subject." 

The letter mentiond writ by the King to the Queen was in 
French, but I translated it into English for the use of those who 
did not understand that language, of which follows a coppy. 

2N2 



276 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Letter from the King to the Queen. 

" February 20, 

" It is now 3 months since you have been in the convent of 
St. Cecilia, and I am of opinion both you and I have had time 
to consider in cool blood how far your retreat is contrary not 
only to our mutuall satisfaction but prejudiciall to our interest 
and that of our childeren. As I was alwayes disposed for my 
own part to please you in every thing that was not directlie con- 
trary to my honour and our common interests, I with pleasure 
laid hold of the hopes the last propositions, made to you by so 
good a freind, gave me of engaging you to discover to me your 
sentiments without reserve, and to let me know what woud most 
contribute to your satisfaction, which I am so eager to procure 
to you in, as far as it is possible for me, that altho you woud not 
explain your self in your letter to the Princess Piombino on these 
Jieads> I coud not forbear ane other attempt under my own hand, 
flattering my self (and not without reason I hope) it may be to 
better purpose, I confess, Madam, your retreat seemd to me so 
inconsistent with that fondness and affection I perswade my self 
you have for me, and so contrary to the ordinary rules of pru- 
dence, that I coud not conceive how you coud contrive and exe- 
cute such a resolution, especially at such a juncture, if you had 
not been spirited up to it by some factious and ill designing peo- 
ple, in which I am confirmed by a great number of circum- 
stances: but whatever has been the true cause of it, whither it 
has proceeded merely from yourself or the artifices of others, con- 
trived to foment the differences it has since produced, the conse- 
quences are equally pernicious, whicl^ I foresaw clearly, and 
therfore, without mentioning my fondness for you, every thing 
concurrd to make me endeavour to prevent such ane event : But 
as to your motives you know very well that you never insisted 
on any thing with me but the removall of the Earl of Inverness, 
and that you never told me in what particular he failld in his 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 277 

duty to you. The affairs of Europe were then and are still in the 
most criticall situation ; he woud be master of all my corri- 
spondence, and I had not nor have I any capable to supply his 
place, so that being perfectly well assured of his capacity, fide- 
lity and discretion, I coud not remove him, tho I had been my 
self displeased with him, without ruining my own affairs. Do 
not yourself as well as me the injury to imagine I can prefer any 
to you ; but I must be served, and as I told you, before you went 
to the convent, the difficultie I was under in that respect, if you 
truely had sufficient reasons to insist on his removall, you shoud 
have told them and suggested some other expedient to provide 
otherwayes for my service, for I cannot belive that you woud at 
once deprive me of all help and therby put me under ane im- 
possibility of carrying on my affairs : besides, Madam, it is not 
only allowable but commendable in a wife to represent to her 
husband what she thinks will be for his service. I am far from 
being headstrong in this matter, and I am readie to hear what 
you have to propose to me, and, as far as it is possible for me, 
to determine my self to your satisfaction ; but if you belive that 
I can easily in my present situation find a minister of capacity 
and whose fidelity will be proof against the temptations the 
Duke of Hanover will not faill to put in the way of all I may 
employ, you are much mistaken. As to my son, my design, 
Madam, in the generall was to appoint him a governour per- 
sonally known to my self and depending solely on me, who 
woud take care of him and remain with him every wher, and I 
fixed on the Earl of Dunbar so much the more willingly that I 
saw he was agreeable to you, by your constant way of speaking 
of him to me: in a word the choise was intirely my own with- 
out his being recommended by any person, and he was so far 
from desiring that employment, that he did not accept of it but 
thorow the obedience he thought due to my commands, at a 
time when the affairs of his family made it not convenient for 



278 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

him to engage further in my service. I thought fit to tell you 
this, because I have reason now to belive he is not agreeable to 
y.w in his present employment; however I am of opinion that a 
pioposall of putting in his place a person so much in my esteem 
and so dear to the best of my subjects deserved so much atten- 
tion, as to let me know your thoughts of it, and I must in justice 
tell you that Lord Dunbar spoke of it to me as a matter highly 
advantageous at all times and in the present situation of affairs 
necessary. Madam, the Lord Inverness is so concerned to find 
himself accused of being the cause of our separation, that not- 
withstanding of his innocence (of which I am thorowlie con- 
vinced) nothing but my express orders doth keep him from re- 
tiring ; for in a conjuncture so extroardinary and when my af- 
fairs woud suffer so much did he leave me destitute, I have re- 
quired him to conform himself to them. I remember you wrot that 
beyond your displeasure in generall at Inverness, you woud enter 
into no detaill of the grounds of your complaint against him, out 
of respect to me. I confess, Madam, it is impossible for me to 
imagine what it is youd hide under this extroardinary insinua- 
tion, but if any thing sticks in your breast, I conjure you to 
speak, out for othenvayes it will be in vain for me to attempt to 
please you ; so long as you conceall the grounds of your uneasi- 
ness, I can never succeed in it : In fine, Madam, throw of all 
passion and prejudice, as you see I have done on my part; Let 
us be directed altogather by reason, by a tender regard to one 
another and by what wee owe to ourselves and our childeren : 
Do not sacrifice, to a capricious humour, your own honour and 
our common interests, and think seriouslie of not only living 
happily with me, but by your present conduct of securing your 
happiness after my death : Time is precious ; hearken to the dic- 
tates of your own breast and my councills on this occasion, and 
be assured youl never have reason to repent it." 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 279 

Letter to the King. 

" 22 May 1726. 

" Sir, As soon as I received yours of the 2d of March I went 
to toun, wher meeting severall of your freinds I showd them what 
I had got from you : After thinking seriouslie upon the contents 
therof they directed me to acquaint you, that their being in all 
the late publick news papers possitive accounts that affairs woud 
soon be made up twixt you and the Queen, they judgd it better 
to wait a litle for the confirmation of that event, before what was 
containd in yours shoud be dispersed : That in the nixt place it 
was not adviseable to make any thing of that kind publick at this 
time, because some litle time before yours came to me wee had 
accounts from London and Paris, that such a proposall as you 
take notice of had been made to you, nay copies of the same, 
with the authors name affixed therto, were said to be in severall 
peoples hands : wee at first imagined it was a forged contrivance 
of the Goverment, because wee coud not comprehend how such 
a story shoud break out and so many particular circvimstances be 
discovered that required absolute secresie, but whats containd in 
your last puts the veracity out of the question and increases the 
admiration how it became publick, seing tis certain neither you 
nor the author coud have any such intention. The author, weer 
told, denys the fact, but were it known that your freinds had in- 
timation that such a proposall had been made, it might open a 
way to enable the Goverment to bear hard on the author, since 
legall proofs are not now adayes absolutely necessary to condemn 
a person thats under suspicion, and therfore tis thought proper 
to deall very tenderlie with that point least it do harm. 

" J was readie on a dayes warning to have gone up post to 
London, having contrived a plausible pretext for the journey : 
1 hope the stop to it proceeds rather from your freinds abroad being 
convinced that thers no need of such a nice enquiry into facts 
that are notorious, than that they ve laid aside their intentions to 



280 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

act for you, and I wish wee may soon hear some good news. I 
have of late writ so fully on most particulars that I have at this 
time nothing furder to add but that I am with the greatest re- 
spect and devotion Yours." 

Here twill not be amiss to remark, that about the time I got 
the letter from the King to which the last is ane answer, wee 
were assured by Mr. William Moncreife (who was lately come 
from Paris) that it was writ from Rome that a certain forreigner, 
having obtaind access to the King, told him he had a letter from 
the Earl of Orrerey to him, which he was directed to read but not 
to part with it to His Majestic : That the letter containd severall 
proposalls concerning the making up matters with the Queen, 
and withall that his freinds in England were perfectlie well 
pleased with Inverness and judged it expedient he shoud remain 
in his service. This was the substance of the letter, wherof Mr. 
Moncreife said he knew of 4 or 5 copies being sent to Paris 
bearing the name of the author of the proposall. How far the 
fact stands in all its circumstances wee coud not depend on, but 
taking it as true, when wee considered the odd method of com- 
municating it to the King, and its being after that propaled, 
some were apt to conclude it was forged to do Inverness service, 
and not put into the Kings hands, to prevent his discovering the 
trick, for which reason I was directed to touch a litle of the story, 
least the King did not know it was publick, it being probable that 
the proposall mentioned in his letter might be this very letter, and 
if ther reallie was such a letter sent to the King, wee judged In- 
verness had propaled because it mentiond him favorably. Some 
litle time after this, wee were told that these copies came to Paris 
from the Queens party, and by the Kings letter it appears the 
proposall was likewise put into her hands and that she had some 
doubts of its being genuine, and in that case tis probable copys 
were dispersed to expose Inverness and the methods he took to 
make the King belive he was necessary to be about him and ap- 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 281 

provd of by his subjects at home. But after all, these and the 
like conjectures must remain in suspence, till time and future 
discoverys unravell them. 

Letter* from Lord Inverness. 

1st May 1726. 

" Sir, Youl find here enclosed a bill for 501. sterling payable 
to Mr. Thomas S'clare, which I choose to transmit to you, not 
knowing if he be still in town. Mr. Cameron is your humble 
servant and I am Yours." 

Mr. Stclare having, iu the letter I formerlie sent under my 
cover, represented his straitned circumstances to the King, he 
was graciouslie pleased to remitt the above sum for his use, which 
I received and paid to him, having got a receipt therof, in part 
payment of what by a fitted account signd by Mar, it appeard 
he had advanced for the Kings service in powder, flints, &c. 
anno 1715. 

Letter to Lord Inverness. 

" June 9th 1726. 

" Sir, I have so very litle to say at this time that I shoud 
scarcely give you the trouble of this were it not to own the re- 
ceipt of yours with a bill theirin enclosed, the mony wherof I 
got upon ane endorsation, and paid as directed to Mr. Thomas 
S'clare. I belive it came so very seasonably as to prevent his 
ruin and put him in such a way as he'l support his credit, so as 
to keep his farm and mantain his family till a generall releife 
come; and I dare venture to say ther is not in this country a man 
in his station more capable and readie to serve his master, being 
in all respects fit to execute a commission which requires pru- 
dence and resolution : I have takn his receipt for the mony, which 
I shall keep or transmit! as line directed. I have also charged 

* Received June 8, 1726. 
VOL. II. 2 O 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

him to let none know of this mark of favour, least it raise envy 
in some and prompt others to trouble the King in expectation of 
the like. 

" I understand Wades to be again in this country to finish the 
dissarming of the Highlanders, and is to make a tour thorow the 
west Highlands and Isles ; but these people (privately) make a 
jest of all he has done or will do in that affair. Wades powers 
are pritty much curtaild this year from what they were last year, 
being expresslie restraind from treating with or giving assurances 
of pardons to any under sentence : and this, Ime told, has its rise 
from a representation of Argiles, that as it was expected he shoud 
be of use in keeping this countrie in due subjection to the Gover- 
ment, he coud not pretend to have so much interest and weight, 
if such materiall powrs were vested in another independent on 
him. Now whither this proceeds from his ambition to grasp at 
all and to allow as litje as he can to pass thorow other peoples 
hands, or that his hatred to the suffering party prompts him to 
suppress all designs of easing of them, or that he aims at merit- 
ing the thanks of whals done for them and therby make himself 
more agreeable to them, I cant determine, tho I incline to be of 
the last opinion, because tis certain he has been extremely fa- 
vourable or rather kind to the Clanronald family and most of the 
other Highland gentlemen that had any dependance on him. 

" Your last came from Holland by the post (which I suppose 
was by particular directions) and I fancy ther may be other let- 
ters there waiting for a ship to convey them safe hitlier, and wee 
long for them in hopes of good tidings. 

" Ime glad Camerons got safe to you; when he tells you how 
he past his time in old Reekie, youl think he was a pritty impu- 
dent spark that presumed to frequent the most publick taverns ; 
and indeed all his caution consisted in outsitting all other coin- 
pauys, so that he was safe going home. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 283 

" William Dundas came here lately from Holland and is soon 
to return : in the mean time his son takes care of whats directed 
to his father. 

" The Duke of Hamilton has been dangerouslie ill of a fever 
at London, but is now pritty well recovered and will be soon 
here: after I have conversed with him, He probably have occa^ 
sion to write again. 

" I left Edinburgh yesterday, and I dont hear of any disturb- 
ances that hapned, tho it woud appear the Goverment expected 
or appeared to fear some disorders, having doubled the guards in 
Toun and Canongate and given orders to the souldiers in their 
quarters to be readie on the first beat of the drum. Such ridi- 
culous precautions make them the jest of every body. 

" Allow me by this to offer my most humble duty to the King, 
and do me the justice to belive I am very much Yours." 

Letter from the King. 

" 1st May 1726. 

" Allan Cameron has delivered to me your letters of December 
18, January 18, 25 and 31, with the papers that accompanyd 
them. The lights I have received from them and the discourse 
1 have had with him will be of great use to me : Tho I was for 
some time in great pain about him, not knowing well what was 
become of him, yet I am far from repenting now of my having 
sent him to Scotland. Your unwearied endeavours to serve me, 
of which he has informed me of many particulars, tho I have not 
yet heard all he has to say, has givn me the greatest satisfaction } 
and your prudence in executing the commissions I give you, con- 
firms in me the good opinion I long have had of you. I am sen- 
sible of the difficulties you may lye under for the present, and the 
caution you must be obliged to use with some persons on whom 
Mar (who I look upon to have detatchd himself from my interest) 
may as yet have influence, but a litle more time will make busi- 
ness easier in that respect. 



284 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

" I remark and shall make the best use of what you say as to 
the place of landing and the manifesto proper to be Uien pub- 
lished, upon which you send me some materialls, which I ap- 
prove very much of. 

" In the present disposition you inform me Panmure is in, you 
ought certainly to be cautious with him, which need not hinder 
you or my other trustees from keeping fair with him, since that 
does not oblige you to enter into particulars with him. 

" I ought not to doubt but Hamilton will profile of the good 
advice you are capable to give him, which will enable him to 
make the greatest figure in his countrie : my veiw is to furnish 
him with opportunity's of doing it, and I shant be wanting in re- 
commending to him proper methods for increasing his interest, 
that he may therby be capable of executing employments of 
the greatest trust : I have alreadie writ to him in this veiw. 

" I had the best accounts of Strathmore, and can never forget 
the sufferings of his family : the fall of his brother in the feild 
was a great loss to me, but it is a satisfaction to me to find that 
his family continues to be so well represented, and I think I can- 
not, in my present circumstances, give him a greater mark of my 
esteem than by ordering you to acquaint him that it is my plea- 
sure that he shoud be added to the number of those to whom I 
entrust the management of my affairs in Scotland, of which I de- 
sire you may acquaint such of that number as at present may be 
convenient shoud know it. And at the same time let them know 
that the services Mr. James Graham and Mr. Alexander Hay have 
rendered me and those who suffer for my cause, joind to their per- 
sonall merite, has engaged me likewayes to name them to be of 
that number, of which I desire you will acquaint them, in assur- 
ing them of the particular esteem I have for them. 

" Cameron has informed me of the project you have laid for 
keeping a regular corrispondence betwixt you and my freinds 
further north, which will be usefull at all times, but absolutely 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 285 

necessary before ane attempt is made ; as it woud likewayes be 
of the greatest use if a safe method coud be found of sending 
letters to you by way of London, which woud make my corri- 
sponderice with my freinds in Scotland more usefull and regular 
than is at present, that it is retarded by the long sea passage. 

" As to what you say of accounts corning to your parts, of some 
particulars mentioned in your letters to me, I wisli you had men- 
tioned what they were, then I coud have made you a distincter 
answer : Cameron tells me it was something containd in your 
letter of the 13 July last year and that he thinks you told him 
that it related to Eglinton ; I have lookd over that letter and find 
that you ther mention Eglintons having contributed 500/. of the 
mony that was sent to Mar for my use. If it be that particular, 
you may depend on it that neither I nor any one about me ever 
mentiond it to any one. I think Mar mentioned the same thing 
to me soon alter the mony was paid. May not this be a trick of 
Mars, and maynt he or some of his agents have been informed 
or suspecting that you writ this to me, give it out as discovered 
from Rome, on purpose to thro dirt on those I employ ? If it be 
any thing relating to the memoriall sent by Mar to Scotland, of 
which you acquainted me in the same letter, that paper was so 
publick every wher in France and particularly at Bullogne, wher 
copies of it were lodged on purpose to be shown, that I shoud 
have been informd of it as I actually was, tho you had not sent 
me the abstract : Tho I am pritty sure your name was never 
mentioned as one of those who sent me these accounts : If it re- 
lates to what you then informed of Seaforth and others of his 
name, I sent some of these particulars to the Bishop of Rochester, 
it being at that time necessary for me to do it, tho I never men- 
tiond to him your name : However it be, I am perswaded that 
when you come to the bottom of it, you'l find that your suspicions 
in that respect are groundless. 

" As to the unluckie affair hapned in my family, the concern 



280 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

of my freincls is very just, but I apprehend no prejudice to my 
publick affairs from it. I have done every thing that prudence 
coud allow of to bring the Queen back and draw her out of the 
hands of her malicious councellours : were I to have yeilded to 
the Queen. I shoud have laid a foundation for continuall uneasi- 
ness to myself, and brought down destruction to my affairs ; dis- 
contented people woud still have had recourse to the same game, 
and the like behaviour woud have been sufficient to have created 
a publick rebellion in my kingdoms, had I been upon my throne. 
As I have conducted my self in it, I furnish my freinds opportu- 
nitys of turning this misfortune to my advantage, which I hope 
they will profit by, and by a publick approbation of my conduct 
good may be drawn out of evill, till the Queens eyes are open and 
she return to me on a right footing, which is the only thing can 
make her and me easie while wee live togather. In the mean 
time my freinds need be under no apprehension as to their cor- 
rispondence, my affairs are in good hands and shall continue so, 
for were I to change I am sensible of the discredite that must 
give to my affairs both at home and abroad and particularly at 
Vienna, wher the Emperor approves intirely my conduct and is 
scandalized at his relations. The various and scandalous false- 
hoods that have been reported by those who have fomented this 
division in my family ought to make no other impression on my 
true freinds than to awake their zeal and attachment to my in- 
terest, while my conduct as well as that of those who I employ in 
my affairs shall remain irreproachable : my freinds do injustice 
to the last in beliving that by their behaviour they have contri- 
buted in the least to this unluckie schene : their conduct in my 
family has been what it ought, and the opinion you mention 
of my freinds, as it is founded on groundless reports, must soon 
change, since they may belive that those I employ can have no 
veiw of present advantage in serving me in my present situation, 
and remain in my family only in obedience to my commands and 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 287 

to prevent the bad consequences that woud attend their leaving 
me. 

" Youl find here enclosed a letter for the Colledge of Bishops, 
such as you desire, which I woud lose no time in sending to you, 
tho I cant at present enlarge further on that article and shall 
only now recommend to you and rny other freinds to use your ut- 
most endeavours to preserve union in that Society. 

" It woud be a great mortification to me if the good of my 
service, which I am sensible you preferr to evry thing else, shoud 
hinder your making the journey which Cameron tells me your 
health requires ; but in the present uncertainty affairs are in, I 
cannot but wish that you woud putt off the thought of it at least 
for this season, being persuaded that my service wont suffer a litle 
at any time by your absence, but much more were matters to 
take such a turn as to encourage my making ane attempt for my 
restoration, which in the situation the affairs of Europe are in, I 
nor my freinds cannot be too well prepared for it. You may as- 
sure niy freinds that my cheif aim is so to cultivate the freindship 
of forreigne princes as to enable me soon to make you a visite, 
which nothing can encourage so much as a strict union amongst 
them. 

" I shall finish this long letter by telling you my 2 sons enjoy 
very good health ; the Prince of Wales answers even my best 
wishes, and Prince Henry promises as much as a child of his age 
can do. My own health was never better and I hope this shall 
find yours perfectly confirmed. My constant kindness doth still 
attend you." 

Letter from Lord Inverness. 

" May 1st 1726. 

" Sir, I belive I need not trouble you with a long letter in 
answer to yours of the 18 December which I received by Mr. 
Cameron : you will be sufficiently tyred before you have finished 
reading the enclosed from the King. 



288 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

" Wee are at so great a distance from you that falsehoods and 
storys sent to Scotland may subsist a long while before their can 
be opportunitys of contradicting them, and as such things abound 
as I find they have done with you for some time past, freinds ought 
not to be too readie in giving ear to them. What vexes some people 
is that they are intirely in the dark as to the Kings affairs, and 
yet it woud appear they are using ther endeavours to perswade 
others that imprudencies are committed in point of secresie. A 
freind of mine writes to me from Spain that it had been trans- 
milted thither from Paris that our Doctors had refused to give my 
wife the sacrament, which is absolutely false : I suppose this is 
designd for the confirmation of another falsity industriouslie re- 
ported as to jealousie, which the Queen herself has contradicted. 
I mention only this particular as one of many sent to Scotland 
of which I may not be informed, and the authors of these things 
shall be dissappointed if by them they expect to irritate me to say 
or do what can in the least degree be construed disrespectfull to 
the Queen, which they woud not faill to make good use of. I 
know my duty too well to give room for such handles, and I am 
hopefull the Queen, by discovering how tender the King and 
those he employs have been in every thing that coud touch her 
charactar, shall find that they are not her faithfullest servants 
whose advice she follows at present. On the whole youl find that 
the separation twixt the King and her has been occasiond by a 
desire of having the entire management of his affairs, which not 
being to come at. by any other way was at last attempted to be 
brought about by the Queens means. If the Kings interest had 
any share in any such veiws, I wish so dangerous ane expe- 
riment had not been made to bring it about. I shall send by 
the Kings directions a bill for 50/. of this date payable to Mr. 
Thomas Sardi, which he designs for Thomas S'clare: it shall 
be under cover to you and addressd to John Corsar and sent 
to William Dundass with orders to forward it by the post, and I me 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 289 

hopefull youl have received the bill before this comes to your 
hands. 

" I shall say nothing to you in answer to the article of your 
letter upon Bishop Irvines death, since I find in one of a posterior 
date to the King you promise to write more fully your opinion 
and that of the trustees with relation to a successor to the Bishop 
of Edinburgh whose state of health does not promise long life : 
In the mean time what the King sends will I hope prevent any 
dissorders hapning till lie can determine himself in that important 
choise. 

" Be so kind as to present my humble service to Lord Kincar- 
dine and Captain Frazer, and belive me with the greatest freind- 
ship Yours." 

Letter from the King addressd to the Colledge of Bishops of the 

Church of Scotland. 

" May 1, 1726. 

" The many instances I have had of your loyaltie, zeall and 
submission to me cannot faill to make me with reason very soli- 
citous to provide as much as in me lyes for your welfare and ad- 
vantage; and wheras being informed that the Bishop of Edin- 
burgh is become so infirm that it is not expected that he can live 
long, at least that it is probable he may be obliged to retire to 
the countrie for his health, and being desirous, either in the case 
of the death of that worthy prelate or his going to the countrie, 
to provide for the welfare and advantage of the Church of Scot- 
land, I have found it necessary by this letter to desire and direct 
that Bishop Cant, and failing of him by decease or his being ren- 
dered incapable by infirmitys, that Bishop Duncan shoud in the 
events above mentioned for the interim reside at Edinburgh and 
preside amongst you and take care of the affairs of the Church in 
my capitall of Scotland and diocess therof, untill I be able to 
determine myself in the choise of a person duelie qualifyed and 
agreeable to my people, to be setled in a post of such consequence 

VOL. ir. 2 p 



290 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

with respect to the interest of both Church and State. I doubt 
not of your receiving this with becoming sentiments towards me 
and as a mark of the particular regard I have for your Body and 
for the welfare of the Church of Scotland." 

Letter to the King. 

"July 7, 1726. 

[The- first part of this letter and a large postscript relate only 
to some mistake in the cypher which renderd the last letters 
from him extremely difficult to be explaind, and is not here in- 
serted.] " I have litle else to trouble you with at present. 

Wade is come to Edinburgh to proceed towards the further ex- 
ecution of the dissarming act, which will be of no further con- 
sequence than what hapned last year. The Duke of Argyle is 
also come, he's going in a day or 2 to the Highlands, but lies 
to return hither in a few dayes and soon to go back to England. 
He try to have ane hours chat with him and let you know if any 
thing of importance passes in it. 

" A lawsuit at the Earl of Aboyns instance against the Duke 
of Gordon for a great many 1QOO/. was like to creat a feud in 
that clan : some mutuall freinds having represented to me the 
bad effects such a division woud have, in regard it was concerted 
that on the next occasion of appearing for you, that the Duke 
shoud stay at home, and the Earl, as the nixt man of the family, 
be at the head of the following, I used all the interest I had with 
the Earl to have this affair adjusted amicably; and others having 
applyd at the same time to the Duke, they both came into the 
proposall and have submitted to the Earl of Aberdeen and me, 
and wee r determined to give it a finishing stroke if possible, and 
therby I hope prevent all those inconveniencies that might hap- 
pen from this difference if it subsisted. 

" Marquis of Seaforths pardon is passing the sealls; this, weer 
told, is in consequence of what was stipulated last year when his 
people made their surrendry, such as it was. 



REGISTER OF LETTER*. 291 

" Your trustees have recommended to the Colledge of Bishops 
to consecrate Mr, Ross, now that Irvines dead, but theyl appoint 
him no district till they acquaint you: they have some thoughts 
of consecrating Mr. Ochterlony likewayes, and of applying to 
have your libertie of setting him over the shires of Ross and Mur- 
ray wher the party encreases, and a Bishop is much wanted. 

" I have spun out the length of a letter tho what it contains is 
of litle moment. As soon as I can execute your severall orders 
containd in your last letters, I shall give you a full account of my 
diligence, which I reckon will be in a few dayes, and at present 
will trouble you no further, but to assure you that I will ever re- 
main Yours." 

Letter to the King. 

"July 23d, 1726. 

" Sir, In my last of the 7th instant I intimated that I expected 
in a few dayes to be able to write fully in answer to yours of the 
first of May that was then come to my hands, which Ime now to 
perform having since that time seen conversed and received in- 
structions from a good number of your trustees. 

" And to begin with that which is of the greatest moment, I 
mean what you very justly term the unlucky affair in, your family, 
your trustees cannot pretend to add to what they alreadie have 
represented to you on that article ; but they direct me to renew 
their most earnest intreaties, that as you have any value for your 
personall your familys and your peoples prosperity, you woud do 
what is possible to have that affair accommodated : for tho theyr 
glad to hear from so good authority as yourself (without which 
theyd scarce have credited it) that it is not likely to produce any 
bad effects on your affairs abroad, tis with the greatest concern 
that they see the quite contrary at home and therfore are obliged, 
by the duty they owe you in the faithfull discharge of the trust 
you repose in them, in plain words to tell you that, so far as their 
observations and intelligence reaches, they apprehend it is the 



292 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

severest stroke your affairs have got these many years and will 
be such ane impediment to them, . that they ve much reason to 
think no circumstance of time, no situation of the affairs of Eu- 
rope can make amends, which thought affects them the more 
that they perceive you have expectations that something will 
soon cast up in your favours, and tis a very mortifying reflection 
that such ane opportunity shoud be frustrated by so unlucky a 
malheur. They do not presume to prescribe what methods you 
are to take for obtaining the desired issue, but they humblie con- 
ceive that you in your great wisdom may fall on some way or 
other that may prove successfull, and they beg leave, with the 
greatest respect and submission, to represent that they belive this 
point to be of such consequence to you, that in good policy and 
prudence you shoud rather pass by some failings in and make 
some condescentions to the Queen, than not repair a breach that 
in all appearance will prove fatall. They have seriouslie con- 
sidered how to put such a face upon it as may be most for your 
service, and which you seem to point out by some particulars in 
your letters of late, but cannot find any expedient so probable as 
not to revive and bring the matter upon the carpet; for your 
people here pf all kinds have got such ane impression of the 
Queens great merit and are so prepossessd with the reports of 
her being ill used by some about you, that tis in vain to attempt 
disposessing them of that notion, especially considering that your 
trustees dare not venture to produce and appeall to your autho- 
rity fora voucher of what they affirm; and therfore they unan- 
mouslie resolved to keep as much as possible on the reserve, and 
rather endeavour to bury the matter in oblivion, than by reviving 
it open away for your enimys to carry on their game with more 
success against you. This is the sum of what I am instructed by 
a set of noblemen and gentlemen, who have nothing before their 
eyes but your honour and welfare and the duty they owe to you 
and your family, to lay before you, and it only remains that I, in 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 293 

their names, obtest you once more to weigh the dismall effects of 
this fatall breach, and take such resolutions as the safety interest 
and welfare of your family and faithfull people call for; and that 
God Almighty may direct you in this, perhaps, the most criticall 
step of your life, is the serious prayer of all your dutifull disin- 
terested subjects. 

" It was with concern that I read that part of your letter vvherin 
you intimate that you take the Duke of Mar to have detatchd 
himself from your interest: I am far from pretending- to justifye 
or even excuse severall parts of that noble Lords conduct, but 
the truth ont is, I had the charity to belive they proceeded from 
wrong notions of things and some imprudent selfish veivvs, and 
that at tne bottom he still remaind dutifully inclined to you, and 
I was pleased with this imagination, because it must be ownd 
that in many respects he was capable if at the same time willing 
to serve you, and I had some reason to hope he was thus inclined, 
in regard I had seen some and heard of other letters from him to 
his freinds here, wherin he prolessd the greatest loyal tie, and re- 
commended submission to you in all points, and that I observed 
these his freinds. did on all occasions regulate ther conduct ac- 
cordingly; but it woud appear you have made some new disco- 
verys, in that you mention him in a manner more possitive than 
formerlie. For my part 1 have no attachment to him, I never had 
any dependance on him, nor did I ever receive more than com- 
mon civilitys from him; nevertheless I shond be sory if he, who 
once made such a figure in your service, shoud fall oftj as it vvoud 
bring some kind of discredite to the good cause, being hopefull 
that a conviction of the steps he had made to deserve the loss of 
your favour might in time push him on to regain it by a more 
vigorous application, in doing something to render him worthy 
ot it* 

" Here it comes in my mind to acquaint you that in a conver- 
sation lately with Mr. Carnagy of Boisack, he expressd a prodi- 



294 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

gious concern at being informd (by whom I know not) that lie 
was represented at Rome as one that attached himself to Mar 
in opposition to your present measures, and he protested to me 
that it was the greatest injury that coud be done him, and begd 
I vvoud represent it so to you. What obligations Mar conferrd 
on him on t'other side of the water I know not, but sure I am 
he owed him none in dayes of yore, and I must do him the jus- 
tice to say that since he came home, when I spoke to him of your 
affairs, as one that I knew was very capable to give a good advice, 
I ever found him act such a part as to me seemd right, and I can- 
not but think any freindship he may have for Mar is subservient 
to the duty and regard he has for you. I the more readily un- 
dertook what he desired of me, in that I think it is for your ser- 
vice to remove evry thing that tends towards raising doubts and 
jealousies of those whor well affected to you and your interest, 

" I wish the project for a more regular correspondence which 
you so much approve of was once well established: Cameron told 
me he had spoke of it to several of his freinds, and I think he 
added that I woud soon hear from some of them about it, but 
that has not yet hapned, and so the affair stands. William Dun- 
dass is now at Edinburgh ; and I shall consider with him how far, 
what you propose of sending the letters, which come to his hands 
from you, to Scotland by way of London, is practicable, and ad- 
vise you of what wee conclude upon. 

" Earl of Wigtoun and Kincardine and I deliverd your com- 
mission seperately to Earl of Strathmore and Messieurs Hay and 
Grahame. They all 3 received it as a mark of the greatest ho- 
nour coud be conferrd upon them, and desired me to assure you 
that they most chearfully embraced this as they will do every occa- 
sion of doing you all the services in their power; and the truth 
on't is, each of them is very capable in their several stations, and 
they did heartily join in the representation containd in the first 
part of this letter. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 295 

" What Cameron mentioned to you as the particular of my let- 
ter of July 13, wherof ane account was sent here, was very right, 
and indeed its so very distinct and jumped so very well with the 
time that I had your return to that letter, that I coud put no other 
construction upon it but that it had been brought into conversa- 
tion at Rome, especially when it was positively affirmed that it 
came from thence, and that no mortall here, but Kincardine and 
Wigtoun(who swear they never mentioned it to any soul living) 
knew of my having writ to you of either the mony or Eglinton. 

" I have now gone thorow most of the heads of yours to me, 
and having nothing thats new and of any consequence to impart 
to you furder at this time, it only remains that I express the great 
sense 1 have of the favourable construction you'r pleased to put 
on my poor endeavours to serve you, and I shoud be too much 
elevated, did I not know it was more owing to your goodness 
than any suitable merit of mine; liowever as obedience is better 
than sacrifice, such as they are, they'r intirely at your devotion; 
and since you are pleased to command my continuing in the 
tract of business 1 have for some years followd, I shall not decline 
it, and if my conduct therin be judged according to the sincerity 
of my intentions, I shall not, I perswade myself, incurr your dis- 
pleasure: The desire I had of going abroad was not so much on 
account of my health (which I thank God has been and is in a 
perfect good state) but to be free of the vexations that arose daylie 
to me from the deplorable state of my couutrie and no prospect 
of any releife, and as it never was my intention to be absent if I 
coud in the least be usefull to you or my country (which I may 
reckon one and the same thing under different appellations) it is 
with more than ordinary pleasure that in obedience to your com- 
mands I lay my journey aside, at least for this season, in hopes 
you may have somewhat in veiw that will afford your freinds 
ane opportunity to shew their zealous attachment to your interest 
and person. 



396 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

" The account you give of your own, the Prince of Wales, 
and Duke of Albanys health is most agreeable to all your faith- 
full subjects, but who at the same time will never think them- 
selves secure and be satisfyed in this article, untill it please God 
to bless you with a more numerous extensive offspring, and that 
every obstacle towards it be removed: This is what your freinds 
in the present juncture long of all things to hear, as it woud be 
matter of great joy to them, and mortification to your enimyes; 
and that God may bring it happily and speedily to pass is the 
earnest petition of all who have a due regard for your interest, 
and amongst that number, of Yours." 

Letter to Lord Inverness. 

"July 24, 1726. 

" Sir, No task perhaps ever puzled me so much as how to 
make a proper return to yours of the 1st of May, which I re- 
ceived some few dayes ago; and were it not that I conceive the 
publick as well as your private interest calls upon me to say 
something to you, I woud remain altogather silent. What you 
affirm with respect to your conduct and behaviour towards the 
Queen is no more than what one woud expect from a man of ho- 
nour and prudence, and the truth out is, I cannot entertain in my 
breast any other notion of it, especially when tis impossible to 
imagine the King woud protect you or write so much in your 
justification, were it otherwise: but at the same time you lye un- 
der the very great misfortune, of the far greater part of this and 
the neighbouring kingdom giving intire credite to what in this 
particular your enimys charge you with. I took the libertie to 
mention this to you in a former letter bearing date 12 March, 
and line sory to tell you that the spit continues against you, 
notwithstanding all the endeavours of the Kings trustees to 
suppress such reports, and that therby the Kings interest in this 
island receives a very considerable shocke. That the repairing 
the fatall breach in the Kings family is a matter of the last con- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS* 29? 

sequence to him and his affairs, is a truth not to be contested, and 
he that can propose a method to accomplish it in a prudent ho- 
nourable way will merit the greatest of rewards. As to your 
part therin, tis no easie matter to give you councell: But I hum- 
blie conceive you shoud leave no stone unturned to be restored 
to the Queens favour, in case the pretended disobligations she 
has received from you be, as tis said and belived here, assignd by 
her (on good or bad grounds tis all one) as the reason of the se- 
paration. I am very sensible that an harder task cannot be laid 
on a man of honour than making submission when hes conscious 
of his innocence; but the high dignity of the party on 'tother 
side of the question and the vast importance of the affair, will 
admitt of some exceptions from generall rules in the like cases: To 
enter further into particulars I cant pretend: your conduct must be 
regulated by your own prudence and discretion ; but as your freind 
and welwisher I tell you that what I suggest is absolutely neces- 
sary for your own as well as the Kings service, and the sooner tis 
done twill be the more usefull to these interests, and the greater 
disappointment to the common enemy. Tho you have been most 
unluckie in that the representations against you have gaind so 
much credite, tis still in your power to regain the good opinion 
of this country by a hearty application and endeavour to set mat- 
ters right ; and that you may sitt about it speedily and with suc- 
cess is the best advice can be given you and the best wish to at- 
tend you. I have by the direction of a good number of the Kings 
trustees writ to him once more on this subject, and I have also 
their orders to signifye to you what I have here represented, 
and they hope youl hearken to their advice, that therby their 
esteem of you may be raised and they have it more in their power 
to do you justice. 

" Strowan Robertson came lately to Edinburgh wher he keept 
in cog and went home a few da yes ago ; and I hear Sir Hugh 

VOL. II. 2 Q 



298 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Paterson is likewise come ; I understand they have both got as- 
surances of not being troubled, but whither theyr to apply for a 
pardon I cant tell. 

" I have nothing more to trouble you with at present, but to 
desire you to do me the justice to belive that what part I act is 
with a disinterested vei w to the Kings interest and at the same time 
a particular regard to yourself, as I am very sincerely Yours." 



Letter to the King. 

M July 29, 1726. 

" Sir, Since my last of the 23d instant the Duke of Hamilton 
came home, and having immediatly calld for me, I went to toun 
to wait on him and was overjoyd to hear from him that before he 
left London it was belived that the breach in your family woud 
soon be made up: I wish to God the news may hold, for the ac- 
count he gives of peoples sentiments therofin England is a con- 
firmation of what has been represented to you from hence. I 
did communicate to him the contents of your last to me, as he 
did of yours to himself, and I used all the arguments I coud think 
of to engage him to make all the severall necessary preparations 
for rendering him capable to answer the trust you repose in him 
and execute what you may in time committ to him, and he gave 
me all the assurances I coud desire, of which he shall not be suf- 
fered to pass unminded. At a meeting of severall of your trus- 
tees he was acquainted of what had past during his absence, and 
he gave a full account of the state of affairs in England, and 
amongst others that your late promotions to the knighthood of 
St. Andrew was made ane handle of to your disservice, being ad- 
duced as ane argument to prove your designing to overturn all 
grants, honours &c. conferrd upon private persons since the Re- 
volution: for as that order is filld up and compleat by those here 
who are installd, those advanced by you must supplant the others. 
It seems very essential! for your service, that such as have raised; 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 299 

themselves since the Revolution, shoud from a veiw of securing 
their acquisitions be encouraged to contribute to your restoration, 
and therfore every thing that may have contrary effects is to be 
avoided: This consideration your trustees desired me to lay be- 
fore you with all submission. 

" In the establishing a corrispondence with the Highlanders, 
great care must be taken to avoid giving ground of offence and 
jealousie, by showing too much favour to or trust in any one of 
these independent powers, and therfore wee think some person that 
does not belong to any of the clans woud be fittest to carry on the 
intelligence twixt them and your trustees at Edinburgh. Mr. 
Murray of Stanhope has (the cause wherof Allan Cameron can 
inform you) his residence in the Highlands: the affair he's intent 
upon (and which I hear lately is likely to answer prodigiouslie) 
leads him to traverse and trudge thorow the whole countrie with- 
out suspicion. He's a person of great worth and honour and 
eminently zealous for your service: These severall considerations 
incline some of your trustees to think him a proper person to be 
employd in that matter, and if you'r pleased to approve therof, it 
will be necessary that you write a letter desiring him to under- 
take and perform that service to you, because you think him, in 
his present situation, the most proper person to be employd in it; 
and another letter directed to the cheiftans of the clans, shewing 
how necessary the establishing of such a corrispondence is for 
your and their service, and that you have pitched on Murray as 
being a person that can carry it on with less suspicion and more 
safety than any of themselves: and that they may know the oc- 
casion and nature of the corrispondence, twill be fit you let them 
know that thers a certain number of persons, that (because of 
the convenience of the place) meet at Edinburgh, whom you 
have appointed to look after your affairs, with whom you di- 
rectlie corrispond and to whom you send your orders, wherby 
they are capable and enti tilled to give advice and directions to 

8 Q 2 



300 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

your freintls for preserving unity in affections and measures, on 
which the success of your projects depends. 

" Mr. Walkinshaw of Barrowfcild tells me his brother in law 
Sir Hugh Paterson has no thoughts of obtaining a pardon and is 
soon to leave this country. Mr. Stuart of Invernity came lately 
from France, but lies obliged to keep very close, having no assu- 
rance of safety, except some sort of a verball promise which the 
Duke of Gordon says he got last winter from Walpole, on which 
Stuart ventured to come over, but hes likely to meet with great 
opposition from the 2 brothers his cusens that are betwixt him 
and Gairntillys estate till he's pardond, whor supported by the 
Argyle faction out of favour to their freind Lord Royston, who 
capitulated last year to vote for hanging the Glasgow rioters, on 
condition Invernity was not pardond. In a councill held not 
long ago, the granting pardons to Seaforth and Invernity was 
proposed, the first wherof was violently opposed by Argy.le and 
the other by Hay, wherupon Wade was callcl in to give his opi- 
nion; he told them he had nothing to say as to Invernity, for he 
had not applyd to him, but the freiiids of the other had and came 
in to the surrendry on the faith of his having, according to the 
powrs then vested in him, promisd a pardon to that Lord, and if 
it was not performd, he begd leave to give up his commission, 
for after that he coud serve no longer. He added that he judgd it 
for the service of the Govcrment to restore that Lord ; for the 
strength and interest of the Highlands were in the hands of 4 
great men, Argyle, Athole, Gordon and Seaforth, and that they 
were equally to be supported, because the suppressing one or 
more and not all, raisd the power of those that remaind so high 
that they might be dangerous to the Goverment. Wliat Wade 
said had such weight that Seaforths pardon was ordered, and as 
tis plain he levelld cheiflie at Argyle, Ime not a litle pleasd they 
think it necessary to curtaill his powr, which is the only way to 
make him hearken to proposalls of another nature; and Kincar- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 301 

dine and I design to get a memoriall put into Walpoles hands, 
setting forth some discoverys wee have mad of Argyles secret 
designs for enlarging his power in the Highlands, and if wee can 
by this means cast a bar in his way, twill put him mad. 

" I have troubled you too much at once, so will only add that 
I am with the utmost regard Yours." 

Letter to the King. 

" August 8, 1726. 

" Sir, Mr. Stralian tells me the ship with my last will not saitl 
fromLeith for 2 or 3 dayes after this, and therfore I judgd it pro- 
per by giving you this further trouble to inform you of what past 
in a conversation I had 2 days ago with Mr. Murray of Stanhope. 
Being informd he was just come to town from the Highlands, I 
went a-purpose to have a private chat with him. I began to ask 
him a great many questions about the tempers and sentiments of 
particular persons in the Highlands and of the Highlanders in 
generall, their intentions as to your service when a proper occa- 
sion offerd, and of the best methods for keeping them in a good 
disposition and putting them on right wayes. Whilst I was thus 
paving the way to make a closer proposition to him, he inter- 
rupted me by asking, with some sort of emotion, If I was drawing 
him in ? I answered I did not well understand the import of these 
words, but if they meant, to engage him to serve you and the 
cause of his countrie, he had been drawn" or rather gone volun- 
tarily in sooner and further than I had done, and that I was per- 
swaded he had acted upon principles of duty and honour and 
woud alwayes continue so ; to which he replyd " My dear Lock- 
hart, you do me justice in beliving the litle I coud ever do was 
from such motives, but Ime now a new man ; I like the King and 
my country as well as ever I did, and I will draw my sword when 
ever thers to be a general effort for restoring the King and king- 
dom of Scotland, but in the interim my head and heart are set 
on improving the Highland estate I have acquired and bringing 



302 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

the mines to perfection (which will be a service to my country) 
and I will think upon and undertake no other business of any 
kind : besides when I got my life after the last affair, I enterd 
into engagements that will not allow me to be active in con- 
triving or carrying on measures against the Goverment, tho 
when thers a push to be made, as I said before, I'le venture all 
with the first." From his way of behaving I can easily see he 
cannot be entrusted in the particular proposed in my last, and 
wher to find another I cant tell. I offer to your consideration 
how far the main design may be accomplishd after the following 
manner : That you write a letter addressd to the cheiftans of the 
clans, much in the terms of the proposall in my last, shewing the 
benefite of their corrisponding with your trustees at Edinburgh, 
and desiring them to cultivate it and have a due regard to the 
advices and directions they may jointly and seperately receive 
from your trustees. Had your trustees such a letter, many wayes 
may be got of communicating its contents to the proper persons, 
and in a litle time and by degrees, many particulars relating to 
the corrispondence and reaping profile from thence may be ad- 
justed and improvd to very good advantage. 

" Our news papers relate 2 peices of news which are very con- 
tradictory, viz, that the Prince of Wales is become a Protestant, 
and the Duke of Wharton a Papist : The first every body laughs 
at; as to the other, your enimys say it is, and your freinds fear it 
may be, true, and if so Tie venture to say he has done you more 
disservice than ever it was or will be in his powr to repair. I 
shoud he glad he were truely become a Christian of any Church, 
but if, as most people belive, thers nothing of religion in it, nay 
supposing it were otherwise, yet he has timed it very ill, for such 
steps in any about you or declaring for you, under the present 
situation of affairs, does you and your cause no small prejudice. 

" Wades still in Edinburgh and does all he can to gain ane 
interest witli the Jacobites : A freind of his and mine (a very 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 303 

honest English gentleman in the army) told me tother day the 
generall wondered I never came to see him, and that tho he knew 
my charactar well enuff no body woud be welcomer. I replyd 
that as he never came to see me when I was in use to be at Lon- 
don, I woud not wait upon him at Edinburgh ; that I had no 
favours to ask or receive, and I woud endeavour to preserve that 
charactar for which it seemd the generall did not think the worse 
of me, and when wee occasionally met, which had not yet hapned, 
our civilitys woud be reciprocall. Some of my freinds blame 
the part I acted, but I can well enuff forsee some inconveniencies 
that might happen if I did not keep myself abstract from those 
kind of people, and Ime sure no benifite can accress from any 
dealings I coud have with them. Tis plain his design is to draw 
your freinds off from you, by lulling them asleep with his civilitys 
and expectations of more than common protection from him, and 
for that reason the alurement shoud be avoided by all who are 
not in circumstances that requires fawning upon him. 

" I have only to add that I am with great truth and respect 
Yours." 

Letter* from Lord Inverness. 

20 July 1726. 

" Sir, As the first part of your letter of the 1 2 of March (which 
I received with one of the 3d of Aprile) relates to a dissagreeable 
affair, upon which I have said allreadie what I thought prudent or 
becoming me to write, I shall be pritty short in my answer to it, 
and begin with my thanking you for the freedom with which 
you write to me on that subject, and particularly in as far as re- 
lates to myself personally. The principles that induce you to it 
cannot but be approved by evry faithfull servant of the Kings, 
tho at the same time I flatter myself that your freindship for me 
has had some share in it. I wont contradict the Queen, by saying 

* Received 31 August 172fi. 



304 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

that my behaviour towards her, which upon reflection I cant 
think ever was otherways than it ought to have been, was not 
the occasion of her retreat into the convent or her stay there 
since: whatever the notions may have been which she may have 
been inspired with relating to me and many others, and what- 
ever the veiws of those may have been who ingaged the Queen 
to insist upon my removall from about the King, what can be 
said against me can be of no deep dye, since it is evident my 
crime woud immediatly cease upon my removal! from the Kings 
service, tho that woud nowayes remove the uneasineses in the 
royall family. But I may safely say that nothing that has been 
pretended against me, by those who think fit to declare them- 
selves my greatest enimys, appears worthy even of the Queens 
notice. This very circumstance serves in one great respect for 
a vindication to me ; and the past conduct of those who are now 
supporting the Queen in her separation from the King, added to 
her giving nothing but the trim 1 ingest reasons why -she desired of 
the King rny removall from his service, shews pritty plainly that 
the desire of my removall does not proceed from any crime tha.t 
I have committed, but perhaps because I have contributed to un- 
ridle those of others and might be of use in preventing the like 
for the future, of which I am perswaded the Queen herself is not 
aware. But however easie I am in my own innocence, it cant 
but be very much my inclination to be removed from the Kings 
service and from having my name mentioned in this disagreeable 
affair, which I do wish for the more that I woud want no vindi- 
cation of my past conduct, which is commonly the case of those 
from whom a prince retires his confidence, because that step is 
seldom taken without suspicion arising from it dissaxlvantagious 
to the charactar of him who is dismissed : and I hope both the 
Kings freinds and those who have any regard for me will do me 
the justice to belive, that I am uncapable of putting any veiws 
of mine in competition with the peace of the royall family, or of 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 305 

beliving that any services I am capable of doing the King are to 
be put in the ballance with it. I think however that at the same 
time that I inform you of my sincere opinion with relation to 
myself, I ought not to ommitt mentioning, that in the light I and 
others see and have seen that affair, either my removall or the 
Queens being satisfyed in her demands woud be far from having 
the effect proposed by it, nay on the contrary woud lay the foun- 
dation for ane eternall division, which is evident to judicious 
people here, if the articles hidden under the demands made were 
not likewayes complyd with, which if they were must creat utter 
destruction to all the Kings concerns without exception, and 
make the memory of those who are the authors of them cursed 
for ever, to the bringing about of whose designs the Queen is a 
most innocent instrument. This being a subject of so nice a na- 
ture I shall not mix any thing else with it, but referr you to 
another letter of the same date as to what relates to other mat- 
ters. I am &c." 

Letter from Lord Inverness. 

** July 20, 1726. 

*' Sir, I had the honour to lay before the King what you men- 
tion in your letter of the 12 of March, which lights he will make 
the best use of when ther is occasion for it, which I pray God 
may be soon. The favourable aspect his interest had and which 
is no wayes diminished by the late changes in the Goverment 
of France and Spain, made him desirous to be furnishd with the 
advices that his freinds coud give him, that he might not be to 
seek and be undetermined when the time of executing comes. 
This leads me to tell you that ther appears no liklihood that Ri- 
perdas fall will in any degree lessen the strict freindship betwixt 
the Courts of Madrid and Vienna, whatever effect Bourbons re- 
movall from the Ministry of France may in time produce towards 
reconciling that C<?urtand Spain ; wee have at present no reason 

VOL. n. 2 a - 



306 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

to apprehend that the Emperor will forgive Hanover the personall 
hatred the first has contracted against the last, as well as the Em- 
perors private interest wont allow of it. France is no wayes in 
a condition to make war, and it is belived the present Ministry 
there wont be fond of supporting, a la rigure, the treaties lately 
made with the English Goverment. Engagements likewayes 
lately enterd into in the north seem to run contrary to Hannovers 
interest and veiws, and tho he shond agree to make a sacrafice 
of Denmark, yet that will not satisfye the Emperor nor hinder 
the Czarina from fulfilling her engagements to him, after he has 
fulfilld his by satisfying the Czarina as to the D. of Holstein. 
Many other favourable reflections may be made ; but after what 
1 have said, youl easily perceive the fine prospect the King must 
have from these circumstances, when it appears that the interest 
of the cheif Powers in this part of Europe ought lo engage them 
to restore the King, I mean the Emperor, France and Spain, who 
have every one of them a seperate interest in contributing to di- 
vide the power of England from any other forreign state and par- 
ticularly from ane election in the empire ; and whilst the selling 
affairs in the north cannot bring any hinderance to it, you may 
easily belive that the King is not idle nor wanting in his endea- 
vours to improve this favourable conjuncture. 

" Seaforth, as the King is informed, has accepted and actually 
received his pardon, upon what terms I cannot tell. He is said 
to be resolved to go soon home, and the King desires you to in- 
form him as to Seaforths behaviour after he comes home, by 
which the King can best judge what his future conduct may be* 

" Cameron is no wayes to be suspected in any dealings with 
Mar ; he knows him too well for that, and his honestie is entirely 
to be depended on. Mars corrispondence in Scotland must be 
brought very low, if, to support his credit wher he lives, he does 
not conceal who his corrispondents are. I hope what I have for- 



.REGISTER OF LETTERS. 307 

merlie writ to you as to the secresie of what you write here will 
have satisfyed you ; but it will not be amiss for you to reflect, to 
whom you communicated these particulars which you suspect 
were publishd here and whither they or those they communi- 
cated them to might not have writ of them to Mar ; it looks like 
it, for he woud be glad to publish things of that kind, to be able 
to throw the blame on another, and you may depend on the se- 
cret of what you write hither without communicating it to any 
wher you are. Captain Frazers being thought to corrispond with 
Mar or to be in intimacy with those that do, was a reason that 
a stop was put to the cypher that was to be sent him, which I 
wish he woud clear up by writing hither directly himself and 
mentioning the thing as it is and his resolutions for the future ; 
for tho the King has a very good opinion of Frazer, yet he will 
not have a confidence in any one he suspects to have a confi- 
dence in Mar, and this founded on a beleife he knows him bet- 
ter than any other. 

" The charactar that the King has of the Earl of Dundonald 
makes him hear with pleasure every thing that may be for his 
advantage. 

" Any letters sent to Mr. Robert Gordon of Bourdeaux, ad- 
dressd to Mr. William Williamson, will be sent to me as well 
as those sent to Mr. Alexander Andrews merchant in Roterdam 
with the same address ; so I leave it to you to chuse whom youl 
employ for delivering your letters to the masters of the ships that 
carry them, and till you advise me otherwayes I shall send my 
letters as I do these, to Strachan at Leith, who I find is well ac- 
quainted with all those who corrispond this way, tho if he does 
not know your last address he shall remain ignorant for me, I 
mean for whom letters addressd as this shall be are designd, 
that so according to the season of the year wee may profite of 
ships coming or going from either place. I am Yours." 



30i8 REGISTER OF LETTER^. 

Letter* from the King. 

" 20 July, 172ff. 

" Your letters of the 12 of March and 3d of Aprile came at 
the same time, to which I have litle answer to make, the last 
being only in answer to mine, and the first relating to ane affair 
which has takn such a turn that I see no appearance of ane ends 
being put to it. If such a letter as you mention you and some of 
my other freinds were thinking to write to the Queen comes to 
my hands, I shall, according to the circumstance of that affair, 
deliver it or not ; but I am sory to tell you, that reallie I fear it 
will not prevaill with her, as long as she is in the hands of those 
now about her and who are working her utter ruin; and hitherto 
the more pains has been taken to soften and enlighten her, - the 
more she seems to be confirmed in her obstinacy, so that all I can 
do at present is to leave that affair to Providence, and pray that 
God may soon open her eyes and bring her back to her duty. I 
take very kindly all that you say on that dissagreeable subject: 
the reflections you make and many others have thorow my whole 
conduct in that affair been present to me: my inclinations even led 
me to humour the Queen as much as possible, but I can never think 
of sacrificing my reputation and abandoning my affairs, the edu- 
cation of my childeren, and evry thing that is dear to me, to the 
Queens caprice, which is clearlie the true state of the question ; 
and I think I cannot do better service to my subjects, and even 
to the Queen herself, than by resisting the attempts that have 
been made upon me in that respect ; at the same time you may 
assure my freinds with you that my conduct in that affair shall 
be what will tend most to the good of my subjects, and I have 
reason to belive that what in a great measure now prevents her 
return, is her being supported in her demands by some people at 

* Received 31 August 1726. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 309 

Paris, with a veiw of forcing themselves by her means into the 
management of my affairs. 

" Mar's conduct is now so publick, that those who were be- 
fore his freinds, cant, I shoud think, but have lost the good opi- 
nion they had of him ; therfore I woud have you to assure such 
of them, wher you think it safe, that my good opinion of them 
wont be lessened on his account provided they forsake him, and 
that as soon as I am convinced that they have no more confidence 
in him, that mine in them shall be the same as formerlie. 1 think 
I owe it to my faithfull subjects to use my endeavours that they 
may'nt be carryed away by misrepresentations and mistakes : I 
have too good ane opinion of Lord Dun to think he 1 be of that 
number, and therfore I woud have you speak to him as well as 
Sir John Ereskine and others, who I need not name, on this head. 
I hear Mr. Carnagy of Boisack is a publick agent for Mar; as 
the last has contrived it, who agent for him are against me, which 
I suppose the first is not aware of. The greatest service that can 
lie done the cause is by uniting as much as possible those who 
wish well to it, and as Ime perswaded this will be your constant 
care, you may be assured that my kindness and acknowledge- 
ments for your services shall never faill you. 

" I refer you to Inverness, as to what relates to my letters to 
the Colledge of Bishops in Mr. Gillanes favours, which he'l write 
to you in answer to your letters to him." 

Letter from Lord Inverness. 

" July 20, 1726. 

" Sir, You 1 find here 2 letters from the King to the Colledge 
of Bishops, which he thought necessary to be sent; The one, not 
doubting but that Mr. Gillanes merit, whos charactar is so well 
known, will add to the respect and veneration due to that as- 
sembly, and the other, in consideration of the inconveniencies 
that attend certain steps being takn as Church goverment with- 
out the due authority, which the King thinks will be prevented 



310 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

by the method therin directed. I have informed Lord Balmeri- 
noch, and desired him to acquaint Lord Panmure, of said letters 
which the King thinks necessary you shoud have communicated 
to them and his other trustees for the better preservation of union 
in what relates to Church affairs; divisions relating to them 
being generally attended with the worst consequences. The 
King expects you 1 acquaint him with the Bishops having com- 
plyd with his directions, and that as soon as they give their opi- 
nion as to the different articles proposed by the King to them, 
that you'l in forwarding it endeavour to send alongst with it the 
advice or advices of his different trustees in as ample manner as 
you can; which is all the King has directed me to say on the 
subject. I am" 

Letter from the King addressd to the Colledge of Bishops. 

"July 20, 1726. 

" The particular regard and care I have for the Colledge of 
Bishops and Church of Scotland makes me very solicitous to con- 
tribute in every thing I think may tend to your advantage and 
prosperity, and I having a very good opinion of the loyaltie, piety, 
capacity and other qualifications of Mr. John Gillane, I do de- 
sire and authorise you to consecrate him one of your number, 
and him to take his place as such amongst you accordingly. My 
present situation and my just regard for your safety woud not 
allow of my writing to you in another form, but it is my inten- 
tion that you shoud look on what is herein containd as authentick 
and as sufficient to justifye with me your proceedings in conse- 
quence to it. I am very sensible of your constant loyaltie and 
attachment to me, and upon all occasions shall be readie to show 
the particular value and esteem I have for you." 

A 2d letter addressd as the last. 

"July 20, 1726. 

" I have thought it proper for the preserving peace and unity 
iu the Church and as a mark of my particular vigilance and care 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 311 

in every thing that tends towards it, to require and direct that 
when tlier shall be any vacancies in the Colledge of Bishops, or 
when you shall think proper that others be added to your num- 
ber, you give in to my trustees a list of such persons as you may 
think every way qualifyed for discharging the office of a Bishop 
in the Church, which my trustees are to send to me, with ther 
opinion upon it, that therby I may be the better enabled to give 
the proper and necessary directions in that respect. And further 
it is my will and pleasure that no Bishop amongst you shall be 
appointed to have the care and inspection of any particular di- 
strict, without my previous authority, and that when you think 
ane appointment necessary, that you give your opinion in wri- 
ting to my trustees to be transmitted to me as above. I expect 
your readie complyance with these my directions, and desire that 
every one of you in particular, as well as the whole body of the 
Episcopall clergy may be assured of my constant endeavours 
to contribute as much as in me lyes to your happiness and pro- 
sperity." 

Letter to the King. 

" September 9, 1726. 

" Sir, Tis but a few dayes ago that a packet came to rny 
hands, containing severall letters from yourself and Lord Inver- 
ness to my self and the Colledge of Bishops, all bearing date the 
20 of July. I went immediatly to toun, wher I found very 
few of your trustees, most people being during this season in the 
countrie; yet I met with more than I expected, viz, Kincardine, 
Balmerinoch, Mr. Graham and Mr. Hay ; having calld them to- 
gather I laid the severall letters before them, and after having 
talked fully on the severall subjects, they directed me in the first 
place to return their most dutifull acknowledgements of the gra- 
cious reception youve been pleased to give to what they presu- 
med to lay before you, in relation to the unhappy division in, 
your family, and of your extroardinary goodness in condescend- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

ing to communicate to them the reasons and motives by which 
you have directed your measures from first to last in that affair. 
They have ane absolute confidence that your conduct will be 
consistent with what prudence with respect to yourself and your 
people does call for, and theyl be amongst the last of your sub- 
jects that will advise or wish you to take any steps, even in this 
material article, derogatory to your charactar or contradictory to 
the honour and interest of your royall family; and therfore they 
have nothing more to say on this subject but to join issue with 
you in praying that God may dispose the Queen to hearken to 
good advice and to take such resolutions as may tend to your 
and her mutuall comfort and advantage. 

" They were not a litle concerned at the severall paragraphs 
in your and Inverneses letters in relation to Mar: They are very 
much perswaded that none of your trustees have corrisponded with 
him on publick business since the time that you intimated your 
having withdrawn your confidence from him: Some of them per- 
haps have corrisponded about private affairs and others to ex- 
postulate with him on his having incurred your displeasure, 
being curious, as his freinds and relations, to know what he had 
to say for himself, and in such dealings with him they had no 
notion of incurring your displeasure, especially seeing in most 
of your directions with respect to him and your freinds behaviour 
towards him and his partners, you seemd to wish as litle noise 
as possible to be made of this affair, and in consequence therof 
you slumnd entering into the particulars of what he was charged 
with. However, the aforesaid gentlemen desired me to assure 
you that if so be you require and expect a totall forbearance of 
corresponding with him on any subject for the future, they will 
exactly and readily obey your directions therm and have no 
doubt but your other trustees will do the like. 

" I know not if what I mentiond in a former letter concerning 
Mr. arnagy will clear him in your sight : he's at present in 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 313 

Fife, but I have sent for him to come over the water to me, when 
I shall communicate what your information is concerning his be- 
haviour, and leave him to justifye himself. 

*' Give me leave now to acquaint you that I have falln like- 
way es into the error you complain of; I call it by that name, 
because I am conscious I had no bad design, no more than others 
that may have done the same, and I presume to mention the fact 
at some length, because I hope it will at the same time clear the 
charactar of a gentleman of whom I and evry body here have a 
very particular esteem, who seems by a paragraph in Inverneses 
letter to be under some suspicion. Some years ago, application 
was made to Mar, then primier minister, by Captain Frazer, 
in favours of one Mr. Frazer heir of line to the late Lord Frazer, 
whose title did extinguish thorow the default of heirs male ; and 
on Mars representing the case and merit of the family, you was 
pleased to give orders for a new patents being expede in favours 
of this gentleman. Fraser having left the country before this 
was done, the patent remaind with Mar till last winter that Fra- 
ser writ to him to send it over, which being done did produce a 
letter of thanks, and that a return therto. These letters I saw, 
and they containd nothing but generall compliments, except that 
Mar regrated his having falln under your displeasure, and de- 
clared nevertheless his firm adherence to your interest whenever 
ane occasion offerd, according to which he desired his friends to 
judge of him. This Ime pritty possitive is the utmost length of 
JFrazers dealings, and that he knows well enuffto distinguish be- 
twixt the duty he ows you and any personall regard he may have 
for any benefactor or interest on earth. Hes now at some distance 
from hence, and indeed were he present, I woud be shy of com- 
municating the contents of Inverneses letter, as I know it woud 
deeplie affect the upright man. In the last of these letters which 
he received, Mar desires him to. make hia compliments to his 
fellow traveller (meaning my son) but sayes he will -not charge 

VOL. n. 2 s 



314 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

him with the like commission to the father, least it be ill taken 
off his (Frazers) hands, being informed that I expressd myself 
in the most ill natured terms concerning him and professd myself 
his mortajl personall enimy. As I did by no means desire to be 
BO represented to any man that had never done me any personall 
injury, and that I did not think it for your service that I or any 
you trust in your affairs shoud be in such terms with any person 
that was, and for what was known here, might be yet employd in 
your service, I did by the advice of some freinds write to him to 
this effect : That I was much surprised at a part of a letter from 
him to Frazer, wherin I was named ; that tho it was no new 
thing for him and me to be on opposite sides, wee had alwayes 
h' ve,d in terms of civility and without personall grudges and bad 
offices; that his informer, whoever he was, knew litle of my 
beliaviour, for that whilst he was in your service I had stre- 
nouslie stood up for him against those who even then attackd 
him, and since you laid him aside, I had rather endeavoured to 
suppress tha,n propale the occasion of it; that I shoud be glad 
he regaind your favour, by either vindicating himself of what 
occasjojnd the loss of it or doing such services as might make 
amends for any wrpng steps he had takn, on either of which 
events he shoud find me as much asi Lever was or any man coud 
be his. falthfull freind* To this he gave me a return full of com- 
pliments upon the value he put > on my freindship, and withall 
protesting in the most sollemn manner his constant adherence to 
your interest, regrating, much, tile unhappy discord in your fa- 
mily, and recommending to your freinds to endeavour the bring- 
ing about a happy adjustment therof, as the best service coud be 
done you. Tis I think about 2 months or more since I got this 
letter, to which I have made no.repLy jior will I till I have a per- 
mission in your return to this, tho by the bye, if you can venture 
ou my integrity and address in keeping on this corrispondence, 
I know JK>! ibut I may therby sometime or other do you service 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

by it : but thats a point I shall be intirely determined in by your 
will and pleasure. What I have said will I hope give you satis- 
faction as to the conduct of your trustees and the particular per- 
sons I have mentioned as to this article, in which if any offence 
has been givn, I am very possitive it proceeded from ignorance 
of your sentiments and intentions and no wilfull design of doing 
any thing dissagreeable to you. 

" Lord Dun and Sir John Erskine are at a good distance ; and 
as what you direct me to signifye to them is not a subject so pro- 
per for a letter as a conference twill be 2 or 3 months before I 
can execute it. In mine to Inverness that goes alongst with this 
I have mentiond what further I have to say of your concerns j 
and I will not trouble you with a repetition. 

" Allow me only to add a sollemn assurance of my ever re- 
maining to the utmost of my power Yours. 

" P. S. Lord Erskine has been here some litle time, and be- 
having with great prudence and discretion, he's much respected 
by the Jacobites : He's now at Alloa, and Lord Dun with him ; 
and he made a visite to Balmerinoch, and I do not know that any 
more of your trustees have seen him as yet, but they desire to 
know your pleasure, if without giving offence they may pay him 
common civilitys as others do or keep altogather abstractly from 
him." 

Letter to Lord Inverness. 

September 10, 1726. 

" Sir, The packet with severall letters bearing date 20 July 
I received on the 3 1 ult*. Severall of the particulars containd in 
yours having a near connection to that from the King, my return 
to him (which I suppose hel communicate to you) will serve for 
ane answer to you in a great measure as to these points. 

" The subject of the unhappy'Vlivision seems to be wholly ex- 
hausted, as well as your share in it, by what has been writ to 
and fro upon them. Allow me only to add, that as their are in 



316 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

this country who pretend to have corrispondence with and in- 
telligence from the very best hands at Rome, and who affirm that 
letters from Mar to the Queen have been intercepted, exciting and 
encouraging her to stand out against the King, (wherof coppys 
are expected) If I say this fact is true, a better service cant be 
done the King, than to send his trustees a full account therof, that 
they may depend upon ; for then and therby theyd be sufficiently 
enabled to contradict those who set up to vindicate the Queen 
and credit Mars solemn protestations of his being nowayes ac- 
cessory therto : This at once woud knock him doun in the opi- 
nion of all mankind, and leave him no credite whatsoever. 

" When Mr. Frazer was so largely recommended, it was from 
a conviction of his being a perfectly honest loyall subject fit for 
the business he was proposed to manage, and I apprehend the 
informers of the charge against him must have too narrow a 
way of thinking, that reckon it a crime to be perhaps seen walk- 
ing in the streets with people of all complections, A man of 
fixed principle (such as I suppose his and many others may be 
stiled after the testimonys they have given) may retain a per- 
sonall regard for a freind, and nowayes concurr with him in 
dissagreeable measures ; and the raising jealousies and suspicions 
of people on matters of no moment and grounds not well founded, 
is far from being a service to the King, and woud appear to arise 
more from personall picques and veiws of those who observe and 
report such triffles than a sincere weldigested design to advance 
the service of the common cause. One of the good effects pro- 
posed by the Kings naming a set of trustees was that such title- 
tatlers woud be discouraged, and I am perswaded Lord Inverness 
has too much good sense and experience of the world to allow 
such any credit with him. 

" I thank you heartily for the caution you gave me, in your 
letter to John Corsar, concerning my trusting those that by them- 
selves or at least their corrispondents may entrap me, but on re- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. Sit 

flection I cant guess whom you point at ; Ime none of these stingy 
folks that are affraid to speak above their breath but in a corner, 
but I endeavour withall, to have dealings with none but people 
of charactar, and hitherto with so much caution that I have 
escaped all inconveniencies, tho perhaps as many traps have been 
laid for me as most men these 20 years bypast : and I am as much 
at a loss to know the reason of your particularly recommending 
my acquainting 2 noble Lords with certain particulars. If any 
complaints have been made that I either enhanced or took too 
much on my self, I wish and woud have expected so much from 
your freindship as that youd have been more particular in the 
charge, and I belive I coud very easily justifye myself; but as 
that matter stands, I need only say I never concealled any ad. 
vices or directions I received, but 1 at the same time acquainted 
the King of my reasons, which he never yet dissapproved of, nor 
did I ever write as my own opinion but I expresslie stated it as 
such. I know well enuff' their are some few displeased that I vi- 
gorouslie opposed them in some steps that I and others reckoned 
highlie prejudiciall to the Kings service, and also that I was not 
communicative to them in some matters wherin I was well ap- 
prized they were byassd by veiws of ther own, and in this I had 
likewise the approbation of others, and informed the King; and 
if any of these gentlemen have insinuated any such things, I 
hope they dont keep in generalls, and I am not in the least af- 
fraid of giving a satisfactory answer to every article they charge 
me with. I mention this, because I see faction and private de. 
signs predomine so much in all interests that I have no reason to 
hope escaping the malice therof more than other people, and 
that I can imagine no reason for your warning me more on this 
than former occasions, unless some such thing had been sug- 
gested to you, and Ime sure I answered your intentions in the 
present matter; for after having communicated all I was entrusted 
with to such of the trustees as were in town, I got a meeting of 



318 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

the Bishops Norrie, Miller, Freebairn and Cant (the rest being all 
in the country) to whom I delivered the Kings letters, which they 
received with all the dutifull respect imaginable, heartily ap- 
proved of the scheme the King had laid doun, and promised to 
consecrate Mr. Gillane with all due expedition, and to give exact 
conformity to all the severall particulars the King required of 
them, (which by the bye such of the trustees as I have yet met 
with much approve of likewise) and I have this day received a 
letter from these 4 Bishops, desiring me to transmit to His Ma- 
jestic their great sense of his care and concern for the welfare of 
the Church and ane assurance of their stedfast loyall adherence 
to his service and submission to his orders and directions in all 
matters. This is the substance of a letter too long to be inserted in 
this, which they hope you will favourably represent to the King. 

" Ime glad youve falln on a way for letters to go by Burdeaux, 
but I am equally sory youve changed Dundas : what Strachan 
has writ to you on this subject is without peradventure fact, and 
as wee here will pay the first tune to the piper if matters dont 
answer expectation, tis but reasonable wee be satisfyed in our 
security, and therfore wee can't but desire that such letters as 
come by Holland may be directed to Dundasses care as former- 
lie ; for as he has dealt long in that business and understands it 
perfectly, wee look on him here as a very honest trustie man : 
he's soon to return from hence to Roterdam wher he'l reside more 
closely than of late years, tho in his absence his son performs his 
part with great care and equall success. For some months after 
this wee'l have frequent occasions to Burdeaux, and as matters 
cast up, you shall hear from Yours." 

Follows a coppy of above mentioned letter signd by Bishops 
Miller, Cant, Freebairn and Norrie. 

" Edinburgh, 7 September 1726. 

" Much Honoured Sir, Wee do by this earnestly intfeat youl 
be pleased to shew our great patron, that wee cannot express 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 319 

how sensible wee are of his goodness in giving such assurances 
of his favour and of his concern for us and our Society, and of 
the great honour he has put on us in signifying his pleasure to us 
and laying his commands upon us by his letters of the 20 of July 
1726, which, God willing, wee shall most punctually obey, and 
wee doubt not but all of our order will do so too. And as wee 
have been carefull hitherto, so wee will alwayes be to approve 
ourselves his most faithfull servants, and wee will never cease to 
pray for all good things to him ; and the letting him know this 
will be a singular obligation put upon Yours." 

Letter to the King. 

" 2d October 1726. 

" Sir, In the first letter I wrot to you after the Duke of Ha- 
milton returned this last summer to Scotland, I gave you such 
ane account of him as I belive woud be agreable to you, and in- 
deed I said nothing then but what I thought was to be depended 
on ; but very soon therafter I saw that I was like to be mistaken, 
for he persisted in his old course of life and shewd no appearance 
of the least application to any thing that was serious : this your 
freinds regrated, but had no apprehension of his entering into 
the service or measures of the Goverment, which can scarce 
now be doubted when favours are conferrd upon him. He's 
made a Knight of St. Andrew, and tis said lies to be a lord of 
the bedchamber and has assurances of being brought into the 
House of Lords nixt winter ; and I have unquestionable autho- 
rity that when hes amongst his comrades, he's full of the hopes 
of getting a regiment of dragoons .and has a promise of a troop 
of horse to Lord William and of a commission in the Guards to 
his other brother Lord Ann. I make no question but hel pri- 
vately assure your freinds that notwithstanding of all these things 
he'l remain firm to you and be readie to serve you when the 
stroke's to be struck, and which I will be far from insinuating 
may not accordingly happen ; but at the same time tis plain and 



.320 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

certain that he can be of no use in propogating above board 
severall measures that may be necessary for spiriting up the 
people and tending in the issue towards your service, which is 
no small loss, as one of his rank is essentially necessary on such 
occasions, and is what your freinds expected from him, end no 
other that I can think of fit for it. Under this state your freinds 
will be at the greatest loss to know how to behave towards him : 
On the one hand, they cannct but be shy in being communicative 
with one that did not impart to them any thing less or more of 
these measures till they were publickly known ; and on the other 
hand, they woud not give him reason to justifye his abandoning 
your interest intirely, if so be, notwithstanding this (which I 
cant but reckon under the best construction a very false step) he 
pretend that he designd to act otherwayes. In this ticklish de- 
lemma wee know not what to think or do, which can only be 
regulated by your directions ; and till wee have them I shall do 
my best to keep out of his way, for line affraid the regard I have 
for his fathers memory will get the better of my patience and 
hinder me from dissembling with one that acts so poor a part. 

" I have been inquiring pritty narrowlie into Mr. Andrews 
charactar, and tis such that I cant enufF admire who coud recom- 
mend to you a person that has not one qualification fit for the 
affair hes entrusted with : In short the sooner you withdraw all 
your business out of his hands the better, and in the interim I 
wish to God no mischeif happen. I have concerted with William 
Dundass (who's the bearer of this to Holland) a probable me- 
thod of conveying letters by way of London, when thers no im- 
mediate occasion of sending them directly hither, but cannot 
say tis compleated till I get a return to a letter sent to a freind at 
London, that I design shall have a hand in it. -,yo- 

" I had very lately 2 letters from Allan Cameron, to whom I 
cant possibly write by this occasion ; but it may be for your sa- 
tisfaction to know that his was the first and only account I beard 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 321 

of ane application to you from hence against or in favors of any 
employd by you. I wish Cameron for the future woud write no 
more by the common post, or he'l certainly bring some of us his 
freinds into trouble. 

" I have only to add that I am in the sincerest most respectfull 
manner Yours. 

- Letter * from the King. 

" August 24, 1726. 

" I received some posts ago your letter of the 22 of May. If 
you belived by mine of the 22d of March that what I then sent 
was designd to be publishd, either you have mistakn me or I have 
expressd myself wrong, for I only meant its being communicated 
to those in whose hands it woud be secure. 

" Had I not observed the imprudent manner with which the 
proposall mentioned in your last was treated by some of the 
Queens advisers, to whom it seems it was communicated, I shoud 
have been surprised at what you tell me of this papers being 
handed about with the authors name affixt to it, and tho I coud 
not prevent the publishing of it, because it was sent directly from 
Paris to the convent, yet it ought to show my freinds how cau- 
tious they ought to be in communicating to those who are either 
uncapable of secresie or prefer their passion and resentment to 
it; and indeed one might reasonably have expected that the per- 
sons name woud have been conceald, tho I certainly never shoud 
have put it to the tryall. 

" Affairs abroad have not much changed their appearance of 
late; wee are impatient to hear what the behavior of the English 
fleet may be; if they commit any hostilitys, declarations may 
soon follow upon it on all sides, and I may draw great advan- 
tage from them, for I dont want freinds that are well disposed. 

" I design, after the heats are over, to go for a few months to 

* Received November 8, 1726. 
VOL. II. 2 T 



322 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Bologna, and if that journey shoud occasion any refinements, I 
desire you won't give any credite to them, since you may be sure 
that before I make a longer journey, which I am very impatient 
to do, you shall have warning of it. 

" Prince Henry has been out of order, but is well again, as I 
hope this shall find you. I am Yours." 

What is said in this letter does not remove the doubt as to the 
author of propaling this proposall : for tho it may be true that a 
coppy of it was sent directlie to the Queen, and that she and her 
freinds w r oud not encourage or hearken to a proposall which 
keept Inverness in the Kings service (which no doubt Lord Or- 
rery proposed, to allure the King to come into a thorow reconci- 
liation with the Queen), it is not to be imagined she woud pro- 
pale it, togather with the author, because he was too consider- 
able a man of the Torie partie to expose to such hazard, and 
even a proposall from him, wherin any regard was shown to In- 
verness, did not make for her, who all alongst appealld to. the 
Kings best freinds and valued her cause in that they were con- 
vinced she had been ill used ; and therfore it is still probable (as 
I observed at the close of that letter of mine May 22d to which 
this is a return) that the discovery came from Inverness, who 
thought it woud raise his reputation and do him service, which 
he valued at a higher rate than his masters interest or the safty 
of the noble Lord, who he knew only favourd him at this junc- 
ture, to bring about a matter he (Inverness) was not fond of. I 
have added these and the forgoing observations on this particular, 
because I had good reason to suspect Inverness in what after- 
wards fell out as to myself, and that in this fact the odds lyes 
against him, that he was the person who made publick this secret 
transaction and therby exposed a person of the first rank and me- 
rite to great danger. 

In some of my proceeding letters I mentiond the respectfull re- 
ception which 4 of the Bishops, viz, Miller, Cant, Freebairn and 

ji . 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 323 

Norrie gave to the Kings 2 letters in favors of Mr. Gillane and 
directing the course they were to follow in the future election of 
Bishops, and appointing such to have the inspection of any par- 
ticular district, which was wisely designd by the King to prevent 
such disputes as had arisen in the shire of Angus: But this good 
temper did not long subsist, and as this very affair was attended 
with many extroardinary consequences, it will be expedient to 
narrate it fully. In order therto I must call to mind that at this 
time the peace and harmony of the Church was much obstructed 
by 2 opposite factions, that of those who endeavoured to restore 
some autient ussages (as they calld them) such as the mixture in 
the Holy Eucharist, prayers for the dead &c. who at the same 
time asserted the right and power of the presbiters with concent 
of the populace to elect ther. Bishops without any dependance on 
the King or Coledge of Bishops; and that of the Colledge who 
were against all innovations in the canons and ceremonies of the 
Church as they were established and practised before the Revolu- 
tion 1688, and thought it their duty and interest to live in a good 
understanding with the Crown, by leaving the King (as far as 
possible) the excercise of those rights, particularly with respect to 
the naming of Bishops, that were vested in him by the laws of 
the land. This diversity of opinions and these different veiws 
were carried on to the greatest height and with the greatest heat 
by both clergy and layety, as they stood severally affected. 

At the head of the first was Bishop Gadderer and Dr. Rattary 
of Craighall, supported by Lord Panmure in so far as he favoured 
the last out of private picque to Norrie and that he might raise 
and be at the head of a partie opposite to the Earl of Strathmore, 
whose powr and interest in Angus he much envyd: To this side 
also the Lord Dun and Mr. Carnagy of Boisack (notwithstanding 
his solemn protestations of the contrary in his commissions by 
me and his letter to the King) and most of the Duke of Mars 
freinds did adhere, some few out of regard to those usages and 

2 T 2 



324 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

others to thwart the Kings measures during Inverneses ministry: 
These private passions and party veiws prevaild so far over men 
of sense, who pretended great honor and zeal for the King in 
other matters, as to make steps directly inconsistent with their 
avowd professions and principles of loyaltie, and which in the 
event proved very prejudiciall to the Kings affairs and the gene- 
ral interest. 

The Colledge again were supported by most of all the Kings 
trustees, who plainly saw what bad constructions the com- 
mon enimy put upon such innovations in the worship &c. of 
the Church, and judgd it highly just and reasonable to man- 
tain the superiority and authority of the Coledge togather with 
the rights of the Crown, as the most effectuall way to prevent di- 
visions and preserve peace and unity. On this side of the ques- 
tion, especially against the usages, Miller was the most zealous 
and violent; he often pressd the Colledge to proceed with eccle- 
siastick censures against Gadderer, Rattary and all the presbiters. 
that did not submit to Norrie; of these he coud not speak with 
the common rules of decencie and good manners, and he bitter- 
lie exclaimd against the Bishop of Edenburghs pretending to 
metropoliticall powrs as vicar general of St. Andrews during 
the vacancie of that see. 

He was of a hot turbulent temper, ambitious, proud and possi- 
tive, and withall was but meanlie endowd with learning, pru- 
dence or discretion: Of a long time he aimd at having the in- 
spection of the shire of Fife, as a steps towards his being promo- 
ted to the archepiscopall chair of St. Andrews, in which shire 
that metropolis is situated : but as the far better as well as more 
numerous part therof declared a dislike to him, he at last turnd 
his thoughts on succeeding Fullarton in the see of Edinburgh, 
who, being mightily decayd both in body and mind, coud not 
hold long out; and with this veiw Miller was at great pains to 
gain the favor and freindship of the presbiters of Edinburgh, and 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 325 

succeeded to his mind with a certain set whose life and conver- 
sation renderd them very contemptible: These he skreend, and 
prevented the censures often designd against them on account 
of their marrying people irregularly (to the great scandall and 
reproach of the order) and indecent practices laid to their charge. 
Miller having to these communicate what was in agitation about 
Gillane, they concluded it was with a veiw of his succeding 
Fullarton : Miller coud not bear the thoughts of this, and his 
partizans apprehended Gillane woud be too strict in his disci- 
pline, and so they resolved to leave no stone unturnd to prevent 
his consecration. In order therlo Miller waited upon Freebairn 
and told him that his conscience had not been at rest since the 
time (that was 2 or 3 dayes ago) that he had given up the rights 
of the Church by the answer which was made to the Kings desire 
in favor of Gillane, and he earnestly recommended his concur- 
rancewith him in retracting it. Freebairn answered that as he 
belived the promotion of one of so much merit was a service to 
the Church, he had done nothing with regard to the King but 
what was his duty, and he exhorted Miller to lay aside such 
thoughts, which coud not fail to occasion divisions in the Church 
and give the King and all his good subjects a bad impression of 
the loyaltie of all who advanced such tenets. Miller perceiving 
he coud gain no ground on the other, resolved on a bolder step ; 
lie drew or caused another to draw up a remonstrance to the 
Colledge against consecrating Gillane, which was signd by some- 
what above 20 of the presbiters of Edinburgh, tho some of them 
afterwards dilated their names or signd a recantation, d claring 
they had been drawn into it from giving credit to some asser- 
tions of Mr. William Cockburn and Mr. Patrick Midelton (2 
drunken scandalous presbiters) which on examination they found 
to be false. The signers of this paper were, the set I formerlie 
described; to these were added a parcell of hotthead young 
men, and a few of some charactar, particularly Mr. Robert 



326 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Keith who secretly grudgd that Gillane, tho a person of good 
age, that is above 60, yet but lately admitted into holy orders, 
shoud step over them his seniors. 

This remonstrance was full of treason, falshoods and ill man- 
ners: it began by representing the encroachments made on the 
powrs and rights of the Church since the Reformation ; it ear- 
nestly exhorted and required the Colledge to lay hold on this 
happy occasion for regaining what was lost, now that the Crown 
was not in a condition to mantain them ; (this was a fine speci- 
men of these gentlemens loyaltie and generosity to the King and 
of their sentiments of the Revolution which gave rise to this 
happy occasion as they termd it) it accused the Kiijg of having 
broke the promise they alledged he had made of not recommend- 
ing any tp the episcopall chair without the praevious advice of 
the Colledge ; it containd their dissatisfaction with Gillanes cha- 
ractar and qualifications, reserving the particular grounds therof 
in petto to another occasion. 

When they did communicate their design and shewd this pa- 
per to Bishop Duncan, he honestly and plainly told them that if 
they presented it to the Colledge, out of regard to them hed throw 
it into the fire, that it might not in aftertimes appear in judge- 
ment against them : He told them they acted a most seditious 
unwarrantable part, with respect to their civil! and ecclesiastick 
superiors: that as Gillane was to be consecrated a Bishop at 
large and not to any particular diocess, they the presbiters of 
Edinburgh had no immediat concern in it more than those of any 
other diocess, and that this practice was a. precedent for destroy- 
ing all order and government in the Church and directly incon- 
sistent with that loyaltie which had hitherto been the glory of the 
Scots Church. 

These furiosi, perceiving the Colledge woud give no encou- 
ragement to such factious proceedings, did not think it advise- 
able to present their remonstrance, but being highlie enraged, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 327 

they dispersed themselves, and in all companys openlie lamented 
the deplorable state of the Church ; and hoping that their pub- 
lishing the story woud deterr the Colledge from consecrating 
Gillane least the civill goverment woud resent it, they publickly 
told that the King had sent a conge de lire for electing Gillane, 
and out of dounright malice named me to be the person to whom 
it was sent and who presented it to the Colledge. Then they 
endeavourd to move the compassion of the layety, by repre- 
senting the sad state of the Church when the King, at such a 
distance, coud not be apprizd of the charactars and qualifica- 
tions of the persons whom he thus obtruded upon the Church : 
And what, said they, was to be expected, if he were on the throne, 
who acted so arbitrarily in his present situation? In short they 
spoke with the utmost malice and in the most unmannerly terms 
of the King and all that opposed them: nay one of their ring- 
leaders, Mr. P. Midelton, was heard say that if Gillane was con- 
secrate, he d make some heads hop ; and certain it is that he or 
some of his gang did discover to the Goverment the canall by 
which the corrispondence twixt the King and his freinds was 
carried on, which gave rise and paved the way for intercepting 
the letters I will afterwards mention. 

Whilst this affair was thus tossd about, I had a conference 
with Mr. Keith, one that had the best character of any that con- 
currd in these measures, and having been once well acquainted 
with him I took the libertie to tell him I was much surprised to 
find his name at a paper so seditious false and unmannerlie: 
that it containd what was plain treason in the sense of the 
laws in force before the abolishing of Episcopacy, and he must 
either abandon his pretended principles or stand guiltiie of trea- 
son in foro conscientiee : that the starting such questions and 
disputes was very unseasonable, as it coud not fail to divide the 
party and at the same time give the King and all mankind a 
strange impression of ane order of men who pretended to suffer 



328 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

for their loyaltie and yet acted a part so diametrically opposite 
therto, and withall so ungenerous, as was the prosecuting at this 
juncture measures that none woud dare own, were the King on 
the throne : that they injured the King much in saying he had 
broke his promise, or that Gillane was only recommended by me, 
for that Gillane was recommended by so many, both clergy and 
layety, as justifyed my making the proposall and His Majesties 
approving and giving directions in it; and supposing, as they 
averrd, that I alone had recommended him, if they had no per- 
sonall objection to him, I had the vanity to think I deserved bet- 
ter usage from the Episcopall clergy whose interest I had never 
forsaken : I concluded with my earnest intreatie that hed use his 
interest to preserve peace and unity and not fly so unreasonably 
in the Kings face, and I added that wheras I knew they were 
jealous of a design to promote Gillane to the see of Edinburgh, 
as I knew the Kings sentiments in the disposall of that vacancie 
when it shoud happen, I coud assure him that His Majestic woud 
by no means think of advancing him or any man, but with the 
praevious advice and approbation of the Colledge and the pres- 
biters of that diocese, and he shoud have what furder security 
he coud reasonably demand on that article, and consequently it 
woud be altogather owing to themselves if it did not go as they 
had a mind. He answered that it was certain the State had made 
great encroachments on the Church, and he woud not say but 
there were some inconveniencies in attempting to recover them 
at this juncture, yet they coud not in conscience sit altogather 
silent : and he had authority to make 2 propositions for peace 
sake, either that the whole affair shoud be referrd to the Lord 
Dun and Mr. James Graham, or that another (of ane unques- 
tionable charactar) whom his freinds woud name, shoud be con- 
secrated allongst with Gillane. I replyd with indignation that 
the King was not reduced quite so low as to make a reference 
or composition with a parcell of litle factious preists in the 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 329 

dioccss of Edinburgh, who as they were serving the Covenanted 
cause shoud change their black gouns into brown cloaks, and I 
did not doubt they d be received into the Godly party, unless ec- 
clesiastick had the same fate with state traitors, in being despised 
by those they served. 

During the hurlyburly all the Bishops, except Miller and Gad- 
derer, resolved and prepared to consecrate Gillane, and in order 
therto they acquainted the Bishop of Edinburgh (then at his 
countrie house in the Highlands) of what had hapned, and he in 
a letter signifyd his approbation, out of regard to the Kings will 
and Gillanes personall merit : but when it came to be put in ex- 
ecution, it was judged proper to delay it, ther being too good 
grounds to fear the factious clergy woud have the impudence 
to accuse the Colledge to the Goverment ; and as ther was ane 
appearance of war and in that case some hopes that something 
woud be undertakn in favors of the King, it was not thought fit 
to give the Goverment any handle to fall upon his freinds. But 
tho Gillanes consecration was putt off, it was judged expedient 
to consecrate Masters Ochterlony and Ross, 2 gentlemen that 
the Colledge had several years ago recommended and the King 
had approvd of; for Falconer having dyed a year or 2 ago, and 
Norrie being at this time so ill that his life was despaird, (and 
he accordingly dyed soon therafter,) it was necessary that these 
2 shoud be promoted and have the inspection of Angus and Fife. 
Miller had formerly often proposed that these 2 shoud be conse- 
crated, and it was hoped he woud have concurrd, but when 
spoke of now to him, he possitively refused and plainly shewd 
tirat he was now engaged on measures which he reckond these 
two woud oppose. Ther were at this time in toun only Bishops 
Duncan and Freebairn and as a 3d (according to the Canons) 
is necessary, Mr. Paterson of Prestonhall prevaild with Cant to 
concurr with the other 2, and accordingly Ross and Ochterlony 
were consecrated; but nixt day, before the diaploma was got 

u *V" ' 

tOL. II. 2 U 



330 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

readie, Millar and some of his crew got access to Cant, and pre- 
vailing with him to alter his sentiments, he refused to sign it ; 
however as that did not invalidate the consecration, they were 
ownd and respected as Bishops by all except those of the Faction: 
and this stratagem only manifested to what extremitys passion, 
and envy will drive even the holy tribe, and that Cant was 
become perfectly dozed and superannuate. This consecration 
highly enraged the Faction ; it was carryed on so secretly they 
did not suspect any such thing till it was over, and they saw 
that the party in the Colledge which opposed their veiws, was so- 
much strengthned, that they had no hopes of making ane in- 
terest there. 

Whilst this set of the clergy were acting so very odd a part, 
the Government (tho well enuff apprized of all that past) took no 
notice therof; and when application was made by some zealous 
Prisbiterians to the Earl of Hay (then in Scotland) that he woud 
move the ministers of state to take notice of such bold barefaced 
exercises of the Episcopall office, he told them that they judged 
quite wrong, for that the Episcopall party were in the high way 
of undoing themselves if let alone and sufferd to go on. But that 
which cheiflie moved them to overlook this affair, was the hopes 
of discovering matters of greater moment, now that they knew 
the persons and canall by which the Kings corrispondence was 
carried on ; for as at this time ther was a great prospect of war, 
they did not question but some attempts woud be made for the 
King, and measures in order therto be proposed and concerted, 
and any discovery of such practices woud be of important ser- 
vice to the Goverment. With this veiw they laid doun the proper 
measures for intercepting the corrispondence, and succeeded so 
well that the first letters which came to me were, in February 
1727, seized at Leith. Mr. William Dundas delivered them at 
Rotterdam to one Trail, master of a ship bound for Leith ; and 
tho both these affirm that this was done privatly by themselves 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 331 

and keept secret, yet the Goverment, being some way or other 
apprized, had, before the ships arrival at her port, sent orders to 
seize and search her, which being done, a packet was found ad- 
dressd to John Strahan merchant in Leith, who being therupon 
apprehended, and the packet sent up by ane express to London, 
orders came from thence to send him up gwarded by a partie of 
dragoons. Before this was executed, my name was mentiond by 
evry body as the person to whom that packet was designd, and 
connecting this with the story formerlie propagated by the Epi- 
scopall clergy, it was commonly reported that the packet con- 
taind a conge de lire to elect Gill#ne a bishop. Before Strahan 
set out he was fully instructed how to behave, and made sure, 
that if he stood his ground with a stiff constant denyall that he 
knew any thing of the matter, he coud not possibly be reachd in 
law ; the Earls of Kincardine and Dondonald and I supplyd him 
with inony, assuring him that if he behaved like a man of sense 
and honestie, his family shoud be supported, as he himself woud 
also gain great honor and credit ; he seemd to understand fully 
what part he was to act and gave solemn assurances of doing it. 
During this time, as Mr. Corsars name and mine were in all 
places mentiond as concernd in this affair, wee had reason to 
apprehend the storm woud at last light on us ; and indeed few 
dayes past in which some story was not set agoing about me, 
which put us both on the watch, so that I was instantly informd 
of the arrivall at Edinburgh of a messenger, who, after examin- 
ing Strahan, was dispatchd from London with ane order from 
Lord Touushencl, secretary of state, to apprehend and carry up 
Corsar and me prisoners to London. At that time Corsar was in 
Angus, wher beliving himself safe, he was not sufficiently on 
his guard and was seized by the messenger, who with some as- 
sistants came privately to Dundee and found Corsar sitting with 
company in a pubUck-hou.se at Glames. Tho I had not known 
of the messengers arrival at Edinburgh and his errand, his being 



332 REOUsTKR OF LETTERS*. 

sent first to apprehend Corsar was enuff to put me on making my 
escape ; and I dont know if this was not done with that very 
veiw, my Lord Hay having afterwards affirmd to me that he pri- 
vately sent such directions to Lord Milton, who executed all his 
orders that is all state affairs in Scotland, with a design it shoud 
allarum rne so as to get out of the way ; for tho the Goverment 
was extremly desirous to make some discoverys of the Emperors 
corrisponding and taking measures with the Jacobites, tho ho 
denyd his having any designs in favors of the King and that in 
such a way as was litle better than publicly, by his ministers 
manifesto at London, giving the lye to King George, and that 
therfore they woud have drove matters to the utmost extremity 
against me, yet some there were my particular good freinds who 
did not care to see me in my enimys hands ; and hence it was 
that I had advice givn me of every resolution that was takn in 
this matter, so that I had time and means sufficient to secure and 
execute my escape, having employd my freind Robert Gordon 
at Durham to have a ship in his veiw readie to carry me off from 
Sunderland, Sheilds or any neighbouring port; and accordingly 
I sett out disguised from my own house, on Friday 17 March 
1727, to Stoba in Tweedale wher I remaind with Mr. George 
Kinnaird till Sunday, that my house was surrounded by a party 
of foot soldiers and searchd for me and papers relating to the 
Goverment, on which I instantly made the best of my way thro 
the wild unhabitated moors on the Borders, to Durham, continu- 
ing very well and safe in ane honest gentlemans house, some 
miles distance from thence, till the wind shoud prove fair, which 
hapning on the 8th of Apvile, I then went aboard and arrived 
safe at Dort on the 1 5th. Whilst I was in the bishoprick of 
Durham, Corsar past by under a strong guard ; my freind Gor- 
don saw and spoke to him, and he seemd then very heartie and 
resolute; how he and Strahan behaved will be afterwards re- 
lated. 



nECISTER OF LETTERS. 333 

About the beginning of May 1 727 dyed Mr. Fullarton bishop 
of Edinburgh, on which the presbiters (being summond by Mr. 
Andrew Lumisdane whom the late Bishop had authorized to call 
a meeting of his presbiters on any emergencie during his ab- 
sence) did soon meet, and in a noisie disorderly manner made 
choise of Bishop Miller to fill the vacant chair; lie was supported 
in this by Rattary and his partie, for tho these 2 were formerly 
at great odds, yet on Ross and Ochterlonys promotion they made 
up matters, and Miller concurrd in consecrating Rattary a bi- 
shop, on condition he shoud have his assistance to be elected to 
the see of Edinburgh when it shoud be vacant. The other bishops 
opposed Miller and woud gladly liave delayd the election till they 
had known the Kings pleasure ; but the experience of my fate 
made them affraid to suggest it publicly, so they were out voted 
by a small majority. Nevertheless the Colledge refused to confirm 
the election, and appointed Bishop Freebairn to superintend the 
diocess in the interim : and thus they continued divided into 
factions, some owning Miller and some Freebairn. 

The factious Bishops (this may appear ane liarsh epithet, but 
when I reflect how litle respect they shewed to the King, and 
their contempt of the authority of the Coledge of Bishops, I do 
not know one more proper wherwithall to distinguish them from 
the other prelates who were henceforth called the Coledge Bi- 
shops) these Bishops I say, to strengthen their partie, proceeded to 
consecrate one Mr. Dunbar (a disciple of Gadderars in the north) 
and Mr. Keth a presbiter of Edinburgh; but whitlier these 
promotions were one or both at or about this time, or not for 
sometime afterwards when Miller dyed,, I dont exactly know, I 
being then abroad ; and the chronology of this circumstance is 
of no moment, seing, be it sooner or later, they did not think 
themselves bound to ask after the Kings approbation ; The in- 
dependence of the Church was now in all their mouths, and in- 
deed they shewd no regard for any powers civill or ecclesiastick, 



334 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

but in so far as they were on their side of the question. This 
was highlie displeasing to a great many nay the far greater part 
of the layety, many of whom told plainly, that as they had ven- 
tured their lives for the King, they coud not countenance a set 
of men who advanced maxims and pursued measures tending 
directly to lop off several valuable branches of the royall prero- 
gative ; and so offended were the managers of the most consider- 
able Episcopall meeting-house in Edinburgh, that they dismisst 
Bishop Cant and Mr. Patrick Midelton from being pastors therof. 
The first deserved some pity, in regard he was a person highlie 
valuable on account of his integrity, learning and zeall, and that 
the part he acted was only to be ascribed to the decay of his 
judgement and being easily imposed upon in his advanced age ; 
but as the other was a factious, arrogant creature and guilty of 
many irregular undecent actions, he richly merited the disgrace 
he met with. The Colledge of Bishops judged it now proper to 
proceed to the consecration of Gillane, and it were much to be 
wishd they had stopt there and not at the same time promoted 
another presbiter of Edinburgh, Mr. Ranken ; for as one of their 
objections against Rattary &c. was that it was done without the 
Kings knowledge, it was a firm foundation to stand on, but this 
step of thers did take it quite off, tho for their justification they 
offered that it was done by the particular express direction of 
Mr. Graham and Hay, 2 of the Kings trustees, who beliving it 
for the service of the Church, advised the measure. And the op- 
posite set alleclged the authority and approbation of Lord Pan- 
mure (another of the trustees) and that the service of the Church 
required also what they had done ; which, like many texts in 
Scripture, is often produced to justifye contradictions and serve 
by veiws. 

In this disorderly state continued the Church from the time of 
Millers election till that of his death, which hapned a few months 
therafter and was far from healing the breach, for the presbitefs 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 335 

being immediatly conveend, they by a majority made choise of 
Mr. Andrew Lumsdane. The Colledge Bishops opposed him 
likewise, and being overruled, tho they ownd him to be bishop 
elect, they refused to concur in his consecration or to confirm 
the election, continuing the superintendencie with Bishop Free- 
bairn, so that the shisism and divisions continued nay encreased 
daylie. What other reasons moved the Colledge to stand out, 
besides that they thought it was decent and convenient to have 
the Kings approbation before the see of Edinburgh was supplyd 
(for by this time they were sensible of the wrong step they had 
takn in advancing Ranken) I cannot distinctly tell, and so I 
wont pretend to assign any ; but this I may venture to say of 
both sides, that the rancor was become so strong, each was in- 
clinable to oppose what the other advanced. Having entered 
on the affairs of the Church I thought it best to continue a short 
sketch therof, without interrupting them and other subjects by 
inserting them according to the times they severally occurrd; 
and I have only to add that the authors and promoters of this 
unhappy division have much to answer for, as it stopt the pro- 
gress of the Church interest ; it being certain that whilst unity 
and harmony continued, it daylie gaind ground, and the general 
interest of the good cause suflferd not a litle, as it occasiond heats 
and differences amongst a great many well affected to both 
Church and State, and gave the first rise to these discoverys 
which enabled the Goverment to find out and interrupt the 
course of the Kings corrispondence with his freinds, many of 
whom were exposed at the same time to great danger, as will 
afterwards appear. 

Nixt day after I got to Rotterdam I writ to Lord Inverness 
a letter, dated 28 Aprile new style (as are all letters after this) 
desiring him to acquaint the King of my arrivall there and that 
I waited for his commands ere I took any resolution how to dis- 
pose of myself; and hearing a few dayes afterwards that Lord 



336 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

was removed from the Kings person, I writ 2 other letters to the 
King himself, bearing (late the 6th and the 20th of May, least 
that which I writ to Inverness did not come duely into the Kings 
hands. In these to the King I repeated what I had said to the 
other, and gave him likewise a short account of the Episcopall 
clergys behavior, mentiond something of Strahans conduct, and 
of a method I had concerted with Robert Gordon for transmit- 
ting letters from Holland by ships to certain persons he pitchd 
on in Stockton, Sunderland and Sheilds (as a surer method than 
by way of Leith) who d take care to forward them to him at 
Durham, as he woud to the persons they were designd for in. 
Scotland. And wheras by my absence and my having laid all 
the cyphers out of the way, ther was no body impowerd or in a" 
capacity to corrispond with the King, I proposed the Earl of 
Dundonald as the fittest I knew to be employe! in that station, 
and that a cypher shoud be accordingly sent to him. Of these 
letters I keept no coppy, but what I have mentiond is I think Uie 
sum of what they containd. 

I staid but a few daycs in Rotterdam, and even keept very pri- 
vate whilst there, for I coud have no security against the States 
delivering me up if required, as I had reason to belive they woud 
be readie to oblige the British Goverment at that juncture, in 
any thing they demanded: on the same consideration my Lord 
North and Gray was a very litle before advised to retire out the 
7 provinces, and I likewise made the best of my way to the Em- 
perors dominions, and came to Antwerp on the 30 of Aprile, wher 
I remaind till the 12 of May, that I went to Brussells on a mes- 
sage from Lord North and Gray, wher I had the honor of a long 
conference with him the evening before he set out for.Bollognia. 
The King in a letter to me, which will come in its due place, 
mentions that prasvious to this Lords arrivall at his Court, he had 
procured him a commission in the King of Spains service: whe- 
tjipr this Lord had before his setting out from Flanders askd this 



REGISTER OF LETTER?. 

favor from the King with a veiw of having therby a handsome 
excuse of leaving or rather not entering into His Majesties ser- 
vice in case he did not find matters like to answer his expecta- 
tions, or that Inverness knowing or but suspecting this Lords er- 
rand, put the King on procuring this commission for him as a 
good expedient to remove him, which of these I say was truely 
the case I cant tell; but as His Lordship was my old acquaint- 
ance and very free at this time with me in all things but the 
change of his religion, he plainly told me he was to reside with 
the King and take upon him the management of his affairs 
now that Inverness was removed, and he pressd me to go alongst 
with him, telling me that tho he was well enuff instructed in what 
related to England and Englishmen, he was a perfect stranger 
to the affairs of Scotland and the charactars of Scotsmen, but 
that if I woud go alongst and take that part on me, he was sure 
wee woud agree very well, as wee both airnd at the Kings service 
and had no by veiws. I replyd that I did not think it fit for me 
to move till I had the Kings orders, and besides, that I saw no 
need of my presence, for the affairs of Scotland coud be managed 
without any difficultie, the King himself being so well apprized 
therof that he coud inform him sufficiently: that I did indeed 
belive wee woud not differ, as wee had both the same honest de- 
signs and I the greatest deference for His Lordship ; but as the 
Kings court had hitherto been miserably divided into factions 
and that the English complaind none but Scotsmen had been em- 
ployd about him, I was of opinion that His Lordship shoud alone 
have the direction of all business under the King; and as this 
woud please his countriemen, I did take on me to affirm hed be 
very acceptable to mine, who, from a zeal I for the Kings service 
wishd heartily to see such as His Lordship at the head of affairs ; 
however if after he conferrd with His Majestic my attendance 
was judged necessary, I shoud be readie to set out on the first 
VOL. n. 2 x 



338 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

call : after which I gave him a full account of the state of the 
Kings affairs in Scotland. 

I cant with any certainty assign the reason of this Lords leav- 
ing the King in a few dayes, tho I presume it may be accounted 
for thus. As His Lordship had no reason to doubt but that he 
was to have the first direction of all the Kings affairs, he soon 
.after his arrivall at Bollognia perceived that Inverness was vir- 
toually tho not personally present; that as his removall was to 
gratifye the Queens freinds and make way for her returning to 
the King, it was too plain that this Lords interest with His Ma- 
jestic was as well fixd as ever, and consequently reason to expect 
that hed recall him ere long, and that during his absence, be it 
long or short, he woud still be entrusted by and have influence 
with the King, which was not a litle confirmd by Mr. Graham 
(now Sir John) a creature of Inverness being immediatly, on the 
others removall, declared Secretary of State, with a veiw certainly 
of being the canall of keeping up and carrying on that Lords in- 
terest and corrispondence with the King; nay this step lookd as if 
it was so hastily filld up, least Lord North and Gray shoud, find- 
ing it vacant, expect it at his arrivall, wheras this was almost as 
much as to say they had no mind for his company. Lord North 
and Gray finding affairs in this situation and being unwilling to 
return back from whence lie came, least his enimys shoud tri- 
umph over his dissappointment, and the circumstances of his 
estate not allowing him to live abroad or even I belive at home 
as formerly according to his rank, he resolved to embrace the op- 
portunity of entering into the King of Spains service; and by 
this prudent step he did the King good service, as it contributed 
to conceal the unpolitick maxims and measures which the King- 
pursued, and at the same time answered His Lordships private 
ends, at least it was the best 2d hand game he coud play. 
I,,;; Having mentioned Lord Inverness^ removal!^ it will be fit to 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 339 

take notice that the accounts therof were heard with universall 
joy by all who wishd the King well. The particulars how and 
in what manner this was brought about I cant tell, and in gene- 
rall tis enuffto know, that he having once attaind a full mastery 
(if I may use that expression) of the Kings good opinion his will 
and inclinations, did order and dispose of all matters publick and 
private in His Majesties family as he and his Lady did think fit, 
and therin he wanted either the honestie or the sense to know 
and act for his masters interest. To support and continue this 
unaccountable ascendance over the King, he too succesfully re- 
presented the Queen and every person that did not truckle to 
him, as factious and undutifull towards His Majestic; and as it is 
commonly observed that such as are under misfortunes appear 
more jealous of their authority and more lyable to take excep- 
tions than others of the same rank in a state of prosperity, the 
King was tooreadie to give ear to the insinuations that the mur- 
morings against this he and she favourites proceeded from a want 
of due regard to himself, which by degrees sourd his temper to- 
wards the Queen and raised in him suspicions of his best freinds 
and most faithfull old servants, whilst at the same time the 2 In- 
vernesses, and a few litle creatures who flalterd them, became so 
exceeding insolent {the particulars out of respect to the King who 
sufferd them I forbear to mention) that the Queen was forced to 
retire to a convent ; and of his subjects, who had served him long 
and faithfully and lost their estates in his service, some did of 
themselves and others were commanded to leave his Court. This 
extroardinary conduct was a terrible stroke to the Kings affairs, 
as it lessend his charactar in the judgement of freinds^ and foes and 
highly displeased a good many princes nearlie related to the 
Queen. 

In the preceeding pages is to be found what the King offered in 
his letters for his justification and what was represented to him 

2x2 



340 REGISTER OP LETTBRSv 

on this subject; and indeed the proofs of these peoples insolence 
and folly being so strong and the clamor against the King so 
universal!, his excuses were litle credited (being in truth founded 
on false representations that were made to him of facts and arti- 
cles charged upon Inverness and his associates) and he was at 
length under a necessity of removing that Lord and his Lady to 
make way for the Queens returning to his family. How they 
attaind such credit with the King is hard to be accounted for: 
the Lady was a mere cocquet tollerably handsome, but withall, 
prodigiouslie vain and arrogant: it was commonly reported and 
belivecl that she was the Kings mistress, and that the Queens jea- 
lousie was the cause of the rupture ; but I have been often assured 
by persons on whom I may depend, that whilst they lived with 
the King they coud observe nothing in him tending that wayj 
and did verily belive ther was nothing of that in the matter. 
Her Lord was a cunning, false, avaricious creature, of very ordi- 
nary parts, cultivated by no sort of literature, altogather void of 
experience in business; and his insolence prevailing often over 
his litle stock of prudence, he did and said many unadvised ri- 
dicolous things, that with any other master woud soon have 
stript him of that credit, which without any merit, at the expence 
of the Kings charactar and the peace of his family, he maintaind 
in opposition to the remonstrances of severall potentates and His 
Majesties best freinds at home and abroad. The Lord Dunbar, 
brother to the Lady Inverness, was assumed into a somewhat 
subaltern share of this ministry, and to say the truth he far sur- 
passd them all in natural! and acquired parts, but was withall 
so prodigiouslie vain and self conceited, that their was no bear-^ 
ing his insolence, and he coud never have keept in with the other 
2, but that having formerlie gaind the ill will of most of the 
Kings freinds, he was reduced to the dilemma of either appearing 
in the 2d or no form at all. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 341 

Whilst I remaiud at Brusells, after the Lord North and Grays 
departure, waiting for the Kings commands, on th 8th of June 
I received the following 

Letter from the King. 

" May 20, 1727. 

" I have received and perused your letter of the 28 of Aprile 
to our freind who, tho not here at this time, hath with reason a 
greater share than ever of my esteem and affection. 

" It was a singular satisfaction to me to hear from you, after 
the concern I had been in on your account of late, tho I cannot 
but be heartily affected when I consider to what difficulties and 
hardships your exposed for a reason which will ever engage me, 
if possible, to encrease my sincere freindship for you. 

" I send you here enclosed a cypher, and remark what you say 
as to destroying the former one. I shall be glad to hear parti- 
cularly from you and how you intend to dispose of yourself: I 
belive you may be very easie and safe wher you design to go, 
arid any letter you send to the Lady to whom I send this will 
come safe to me : she hath been often employd and trusted in 
such like matters, and hath behaved with much prudence, and 
that made me think the safest way to convey this to you was 
thorow her canal. 

" I have not occasion to say more till I know this is come to 
your hands. The family here are in good health. I hope you 
do not doubt my sincere value and kindness for you." 

A few days after my receiving this letter Mr. Dundas sent me 
another, of the same date, which came under his cover. 

Letter from the King. 

" 20 May, 1727. 

" This is only to inform that I received with great satisfaction 
the letter to our freind of the 28 Aprile, and that the answer to 
it is sent to Brussels to the Lady Mary Rose Howard of Norfolk 



342 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

at the English Dominican Nuns there (addrest for Mr. Brown) 
who will deliver it to you when ever you call or send for it, by- 
writing to her in your own name, with which you may safely 

trust her. Postscrip I was extream glad to hear from you. 

You know this 'hand writing, so I dont sign because it goes by 
the common post to William Dundas." 

Letter from Lord Dunbar, 

"May 20, 1727. 

Sir, As 1 have had a most constant and uninterrupted 
freindship and respect for you ever since the beginning of our 
old acquaintance to this day, you will I hope easily belive, I re- 
marked the dangers you have been lately exposed to by your 
zealous labours in the good cause, with anxious concern, and 
that I rejoice to hear of your arrival] on this side of the sea. I 
have not written to you for several years having had no call to 
it in the way of business and judging it improper for me to trou- 
ble and endanger my freinds by a corrispondence that coud not 
be usefull in proportion to the risque they might run by it ; but 
since this reason subsists no longer as to you, I imbrace with 
pleasure the first occasion of making ane offer to you of my most 
humble service in these parts, in the same spirit and with the 
same sentiments you have formerlie known me for a tract of 
years, which never can admit of a change: I wish only that the 
experience I have had in different scenes of life may make me 
less unwise than you have forrnerlie known me, but these are 
things are not in our power. 

" I shoud be glad to know the situation of your private affairs, 
of the time you expect to stay abroad and of your scheme for 
disposing yourself during that while. 

" The King and his family ,are, blissed be God, in most perfect 
health: his son must be allowd to be every way the finest young 
gentleman of his age in Europe, which will be J dare say suffi- 



REGISTER OP LETTERS, 343 

cient to- encrcase a curiosity which must be natural! to you on 
all accounts. 1 shall long with impatience to hear from you, and 
in the mean time be assured that I am Yours." 

I soon perceived that this last freindly letter was writ with a 
veiw of pumping me as to any design or desire I had of repairing 
to the King, and if I did, to pave the way for my entering into 
measures with the favourites ; but as I resolved to take no resolu- 
tions till I heard from Lord North and Gray, in my returns to 
the King and Dunbar, dated 9th of June (of which I keept no 
coppy) I only in generall terms thanked them both for the con- 
cern expressd for me, and gave them such ane account of my 
circumstances that it was easie to be seen I had then no prospect 
of returning in hast to Britain.. I likewise mentioned some things 
ommitted in my former touching the behavior of the Episcopal! 
clergy, and how that His Grace of Hamilton had turnd his cloak 
to the other shoulder and was so- fond of serving King George,- 
that since he coud not procure any other post in the army, he had 
solicited and obtaind libertie to serve as a volunteer, or as was 
confidently reported and I belive trucly, as aid de camp to his 
unklc the Earl of Orkney. As to my being or not being perso- 
nally with the King, I expressd myself in such a manner, as might 
show I was not to palm myself on him nor yet to decline it in 
case he required it; which I belive was agreeable to Dunbar, for 
1)6 knew me too well, not to forsee I woud not truckle, and for 
that reason did not secretly wish for my company. 

I formerlic rnenliond that soon after Invernesses removall Mr. 
Graham (a young gentleman of good parts and son to Mr. James 
Graham who was soliciter to the late King James, descended 
from ane eminently loyall family) was knighted and declared 
Secretary of State, and he soon wrote to me the following 

Letter * from Sir John Graham. 

* Received 2 July, 1727. 



344; REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

"June 4, 1727. 

"Sir, The King does me a very sensible favor in giving me this 
opportunity of writing to a person for whom I ever had the great- 
est esteem, and who line perswaded very well deserves the good 
opinion entertaind of him by His Majestic and by all those who 
are his faithfull freinds. 

" His Majestie orders me to acknowledge the receipt of your 
letter of the 6th of May and to tell you that having alreadie 
answered a former letter of yours to Lord Inverness, of the 
28 Aprile, he delays writing to you till he hears from you again. 

" Give me leave, sir, to assure you of my respects and to flat- 
ter myself of being allowd a share in your freindship, which 
shall be alwayes highlie valued by him who is with great since- 
rity Yours." 

To this I writ ane answer, dated 3d July, containing assurance 
of my regard for Sir John, and hoping that the great freindship 
twixt our 2 fathers might descend to the sons ; and as I wishd 
him joy of his late preferment, as his freind, I advised him to use 
his utmost endeavours to bring about a reconciliation of the 
royal pair, that he coud do no better service to his master and 
the good cause, and it woud likewise be much for his own honor 
and interest. 

Letter* from the King. 

" June 14, 1727. 

" Yours of the 20th of May came to me in due time. I hope 
this will find you easie and unmolested at Aix la Chappie. This 
goes by Mr. Waters canall, and as long as you are in those parts 
I think it will be best, and if you shoud remove I suppose you 
will advertise him how to forward letters to you. 

" Our worthy freind Lord North and Gray arrived here last 
night and will part in a few dayes for Spain, wher at my recom- 

* Received 12 July 1727. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 345 

menclation he is to be received in the same rank in the army he 
formerly was. I hope what he will be able to represent of the 
favorable dispositions will make some impressions there : the 
good will is certainly not wanting in that Court no more than in 
that of Vienna, but till the last be engaged in ane open war 
with the Elector of Hannover, they will not do any thing for 
me ; but you may depend upon it, that they will do evry thing 
if that happens, and I dont well see how it can be otherwayes 
at last, for tho they seem desirous of peace, yet the animositys 
betwixt Hanover and the Emperor have run so high, and it seems 
so difficult to adjust, in a peaceable manner, the different interests 
which are now in debate, that a war I think scarce can be at last 
avoided. This is all I can say at present in relation to publick 
affairs, and I wish you coud find a way of acquainting my Scots 
freinds with as much, for I dont think it prudent to write any 
thing my self till the storm which drove you abroad is quite over. 

" As for my corrispondence with Scotland, the good opinion I 
alreadie have of Dundonald makes me enter with pleasure into 
what you mention as to him, and I woud have you as soon as 
you can with safety send him a copy of the cypher I lately sent 
you, for the old cyphers must on no account be made any more 
use of, and by that time you know he has received it, I reckon 
the Parliament will be up and all will be quiet, and I will then 
write to him my self, if you find he is willing to enter into a cor- 
rispondence with me ; and in the interim if any thing of impor- 
tance interveens of which my Scots freinds shoud be apprized, I 
shall acquaint you with it that you may transmit! such lights to 
them in the safest manner. I think the method you propose for 
corresponding is very good, if you are intirely sure of the pru- 
dence and honesty of Gordon at Durham. I have not the least 
doubt of Dundas, but he is now so noted for being employd in 
such matters that I dont know if it woud be adviseable to make 
use of him in them at present; but I leave it to your direction to 
VOL. n. 2 y 



346 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

employ him or any other person you think proper for that pur- 
pose. I suppose you will take the proper measures with Gordon 
that the method in which he sends letters to Scotland may be very 
sure and unobserved, and I think it woud also be expedient that 
such letters be delivered to some body appointed by Dundonald 
rather than to himself, on account of his own safety. As for 
the expences of such expresses, Gordon has only to send every 
now and then ane account of them to me and it shall be paid, 
and the services which he renders in that respect remembered 
when better dayes come. 

" I am heartily sory ther shoud be such jars and disputes as 
you mention amongst those who wish me well in Scotland, and 
that they shoud have givn any occasion to the trouble you and 
others have been brought into. I cant but take very kindly of 
Mr. Ch. Erskine the regard which you say he shewd to you on 
this occasion. 

" I send you enclosed a paper that has been sent into England 
and Scotland upon Invernesses leaving this place : I thought it 
was fit you shoud see it. 

" The family here are in good health. I hope I shall hear 
often from you wher you are: you know the just value I have 
for you, and how agreeable it will be to me that you write often 
and freelie to me. 

" P. S. Whatever the originall ground was of the discovery of 
the letters lately sent to Scotland, it appears to me it must have 
come from Holland, and it woud be worth the while coming to 
the bottom of it if possible." 

Coppy of the paper mentiond in the above letter. 
" Lord Inverness gives himself ane account of the resolution 
he has takn to absent himself from my person : it is what he has 
been long pressing me to allow of, but I never woud concent to 
it, seing how contrary it is to my honor and interest, tho I have 
not thought fit at this time to interpose my absolute authority to 



, I 
REGISTER OP LETTERS, 347 

prevent it. You know the great and good opinion I have long 
had of that Lord, and it is now with reason augmented by the 
sacrifice he will make of himself for the good of my family in 
this conjuncture, which ought to en crease his merit with all ho- 
nest men, and I hope to have yet soon occasion to show in his 
person that I am incapable of abandoning my faithful! servants. 
To my no small concern the outward appearance is otherwise at 
present and will be constantly attended with consequences con- 
trary to the good of my service, but I shall endeavour in so ex- 
troardinary a case to manage matters so as that they may be it as 
litle as possible. None of my freinds ought to be under any ap- 
prehensions on this occasion as to ther private safety : Lord In- 
verneses fidelity and prudence I can equally depend upon wher 
ever he is, and I thought it woud be ane ease and satisfaction to 
them as well as a justice to him to give him, as I have now done, 
a new and publick mark of my favour, that it might be out of 
the powr of my enimys to put any wrong construction upon my 
giving the seals to another. The person I have chose for that is 
Sir John Grahame, who has served me with much secresie and 
prudence for a considerable time : He is alreadie partly in the 
secret of my affairs, he has no dependance but on my self and 
will literally execute my orders, which are qualifications which 
I know will please my true freinds as much as they will un- 
doubtedly make him soon feell the malice of those who will al- 
wayes attack whoever serves me faithfully." 

The contents of this paper did surprize and vex me not a litle ; 
as it was not designd to be a secret, the Queen and her freinds 
as well as the Kings woud be apprized of it, and I easily foresaw 
it woud allarum them with the apprehension that the King woud 
still be influenced by Inverness and probably in time recall him. 
On enquiry I coud not hear of any to whom it was communicate 
in Scotland, nor the paper said to be sent by that Lord himself, 



348 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

(perhaps the person entrusted with them, wisely conceald them) 
but I knew they were sent to James Hamilton at London who 
carefully publishd them, to His Majesties no small disservice. 
This litle pert insignificant fellow was the bastard son of ane 
Irish gentleman, and formerlie, for several years, Strowan Ro- 
bertsons servant, after which he was employd by the Duke of 
Hamilton, Mr. Ch. Leslie and others to hand about satires against 
the Goverment and at last to deliver letters which came from the 
King under cover to Jo, Meizies, wlu'lst he was his agent at 
London before 1715. This musroom Inverness pitchd on to be 
trusted with the Kings affairs at London,, and indeed he turnd 
prodigious vain upon it, even so far as publickly to let it be 
known ; and he pretended to be intirely trusted by the men of first 
rank in England, who however were more cautious than to have 
any dealings with him. As this spark was raised and supported by 
Inverness, he was very faithfull to him ; he spread what stories 
His Lordship directed in his own commendation and to discredite 
the Queen ; nay whilst the King was this summer at Avignion he 
made a journey thither, pretending he was sent by the heads of 
his English freinds to assure him they so far approved his con- 
duct with regard to the Queen and condemnd hers, that if he 
was on the throne they d strike off her head, and that severall of 
the most learnd divines of the Church of England were of opi- 
nion ther was sufficient grounds for a divorce. This bag of lyes 
and nonesence was nevertheless favorably heard and so far from 
being a secret, that a person of rank in the Emperors service 
askt me if it was possible that the King coud entertain any such 
notion as a divorce. Hamilton was much carressd and with a 
present of 400/. sterling sent back to his post at London, whilst 
at the same time Robert Freebairn the bookseller was raised to 
the same trust in Scotland. Having once named this Hamilton I 
thought it best to mention at once all I had to say of him, and I 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 349 

will only observe that the employing such mean ratleheaded per- 
sons, gave a great discredit to the Kings affairs and was no small 
imputation to his ministers that advised him^ 

For a considerable time bypast the posture of affairs in Europe 
seemd to portend war. A congress was held and lasted some 
years at Cambray, whither resorted the ambassadors of most of 
the potentates, but no advance whatsoever was made towards 
adjusting the claims and differences betwixt the Emperor and 
the King of Spain, nor satisfying the British and Dutch in their 
complaints against the Ostend company trading to the East In. 
dies ; when all of a sudden, to the surprize of all mankind, the 
Emperor and King of Spain enterd into a separate aliyance, in> 
consequence wherof the Emperor on certain conditions re- 
nounced all pretensions to the Spanish dominions, that is such 
parts of them as Philip was then possesd of and had not been 
alienated to the Emperor by the treatie of Utreight, and they 
were mutually to assist and defend each other against all who 1 
shoud attack or molest them: to which allyance the Czaarina in* 
time acceded. 

This powrfull allyance soon produced a counter one twixt the 
Kings of France and Britain and the States of Holland. The 
2 last mantaind that the Fleemings were bound by former trea- 
ties not to carry on a trade to the East Indies, and finding that 
the Ostend company run away with a great part of that business,, 
insisted to have it dissolved : The British expected that Spain 
woud attempt to recover Gibraltar: and France, that is the Mi- 
nisters during the Kings minority, either bribd by British gold or 
willing to prevent the growing powr of the Emperor, enterd into 
measures with the other 2 ; but as these coud make no stand by 
land against the Vienna aHyance, without France, she therby 
attaind the ballance of Europe at her absolute disposall, which- 
Lewis le Grand had long aimd at but coud never obtain. 

At the forming these allyances, those of Vienna hoped that 



350 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

France woud not enter, at least not be heartie, in the quarrell, 
but when the contrary appeard it stopt there carrier. Nothing 
at first and for a long time was spoke of but war, and prepara- 
tions for it were universall : the King of Spain actually laid seige 
to Gibraltar, the British Parliament raised and hired troops, gave 
mony lavishly and what was more, ane unlimited credit to King 
George, who orderd a good body of foot and dragoons to em- 
bark for Flanders ; but just when every thing was readie and 
lookd like entering upon action, the ministers of France, Britain, 
Holland and the Emperor (of whose schemes the death of the 
Czaarina not long before made a vast alteration) agreed at Paris 
on a congress for selling all claims and disputes, and in order 
t her to signd certain preliminary articles to which Spain after- 
wards acceded : in consequence wherof the prosecution of the 
war ceased. 

The particulars of this part of general! history and what fol- 
lowd on it being forreing to my purpose I pass over. During 
these negotiations at severall Courts, the King did not omuiit 
making proper applications, and ther was a generall expecta- 
tion of ane attempt in his favors. The King of Spain was bent 
on the recovery of Gibraltar and personally haled King George, 
never forgetting how his fleets and projects in Sicily had been 
destroyd by Ihe British fleet. The Czaarina wanted to restore 
her son in law the Duke of Holstein to his dominions violently 
possest by Denmark and supported therin by King George; and 
the Emperor was uneasie at ane Elector and powrfull Prince of 
the Empire being at the same time King of Britain; and in these 
lights it was manifestly the interest of all these princes to restore 
the King, if so be it appeard practicable, of which for some time 
by past he had been endeavouring to convince them, and twas 
said he had good reason to expect something to purpose woud 
have been undertaken for him, had the war gone on. But all 
these schemes and hopes vanishd, at least were suspended, on 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 351 

the signing of the preliminarys, soon after which, King George 
dyed at Osnaburg in his way to Hanover on the 2d of June 1727. 
This death occasiond no alterations of the face of affairs abroad, 
the sevral princes going on in the measures concerted before 
it hapned, and his son enterd peaceably to the posession of the 
crown ; and indeed his succession coud not have falln out at 
any time more to his advantage, for the other potentates, having 
made such advances towards a peace or at least towards post- 
poning the war, coud not in honor, nor had they any scheme 
prepared to, resile: the British troops were lately much aug- 
mented and the Exchequer was full of mony, and as their was 
no veiw of nor preparations made to oppose his accession to the 
throne at this time, he was received with universall joy. 

The English nation is remarkably fond of novelties ; this 
prince had affected popularity, and being in ill terms with his 
father and his German ministers, whatever was dissobliging in 
them, did engratiate him ; and the populace formed such notions 
of his prudent administration, that they seemd quite to forget 
and drop the bad impression and resentment which they for- 
merlie entertaind of the unavoidable consequences of being un- 
der the dominion of a forreigne family. Nay the heads of the 
Tories, both laitie and clergy, seemd to strive with the Whigs 
in making court, whither only to conceal their other designs, or 
that they expected to be received into favor, seing most of those 
employd in the late reigne had used this King George pritty 
contemptably, I shant determine, but this step of theirs contri- 
buted not a litle to raise his charactar at the commencement of 
his reigne, and their veiws of being employd soon vanishd and 
then they repented the step they had made. 

Before I proceed in my main design, having mentiond King 
George death, it will not be reckond a great digression to give 
ane account of a paper which perhaps is not so well known in 
Britain as other parts of Europe. About 8 or ten weeks after 



353 KEGISTER OF LETTEHS. 

bis death, the coppy of a letter was propagated and handed about 
at most of the Courts of Europe, especially in Germany. Ane ac- 
count and coppy therof was, whilst I was at Aix la Chappie, 
sent by a gentleman of distinction in Paris to a French officer, 
and the like from Vienna to General Count Veiling governor of 
Luxenburg, who gave me the coppy of it and assured me it was 
dispersed over all Germany. He added that some people gave 
no credit to the commission, mentiond in the letter, being either 
given or executed, beliving the whole to be a story forged to 
vindicate the reputation of the late Electrice of Hannover. How- 
ever that be, it took with a great many, and be the story true 
or false, the dispersing it so industriouslie shewed that the said 
Electrices freinds, some naming her son and others the King of 
Prussia, carried their resentment high against her husband, by 
their endeavours to blacken his memory and represent his exit 
in such a manner. 

Follows the Letter in English from the French. 

" The circumstances of King Georges death are terrible and 
worth the knowledge of all our freinds: they are keept as much 
conceald as possible even in Germany, so probably will be a se- 
cret both in England and France. What was told me lately, by 
a person of superior rank and of great esteem in these parts, I 
had heard imperfectly before from a Lady of quality. It seems 
when the late Electress was dangerouslie ill of her last sickness 
she deliverd to a faithfull freind a letter to her husband, upon 
promise that it shoud be givn into his own hands. It containd 
a protestation of her innocence, a reproach for his hard ussage 
and unjust treatment, and concluded with a summons or citation 
to her husband to appear within the year and day at the Divine 
tribunal! and ther to answer for the long and many injuries she 
had received from him. As this letter coud not with safety to 
the bearer be delivered in England or Hannover, it was givn to 
him in his coach on the road. He opened it immediatjy, sup- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 353 

posing it came from Hanover ; He was so struck with these un- 
expected contents and his fatall citation, that his convulsions 
and appoplexy came fast on him: After being blooded, his mouth 
turnd awray and they then proposed to drive off to a nearer 
place than Osnaburg, but he signd twice or thrice with his 
hand to go on, and that was the only mark of sense he shewed. 
This is no secret amongst the Catholicks in Germany, but the 
Protestants hush it up as much they can." 

But now to leave these subjects, I proceed to the answer I sent 
to the Kings last letter. 

Letter to the King. 

" 28 July 1727. 

*< Sir, I had the honor a few dayes ago to receive yours of 
the 14 of June, and I lost no time in setting about the execution 
of what you committed to me, for having the occasion of one 
going to Scotland, on whom I coud depend, I writ to Kincar- 
dine to acquaint Dundonald that you had made choise of the lat- 
ter to be your corrispondent and desired they woud pitch on some 
proper person to receive such letters as came from you addressd 
to Mr. Robert Anderson merchant in Dingwall, and give pru- 
dent directions to that person about conveying these letters to 
Dundonald, without letting that person know from or to whom 
they were, which might be easily enuff contrived : That this 
being done, they shoud by a sure hand, send ane unsignd letter 
to William Dundas, acquainting him of the persons name to 
whose care he shoud transmit such letters as came to his hands 
addressd as above. If they manage this matter with the caution 
they may and shoud, and keep the secret to themselves, the in- 
conveniencies that have hapned may be prevented in case of fu- 
ture mistakes. I reckon it will be convenient that you direct 
Dundas to send you notice when he receives that letter and the 
name and address of the person to whom he's to convey the let- 
ters, after which you may either send them by his, or Robert 

VOL. IL 2 z 



354 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

Gordon at Burdeaux or any other canall, as you judge proper at 
any time; for -what you observe as to Dundas, with respect to 
the suspicion lie is under, is too true. I can assuredly depend 
on the prudence and fidelity of Mr. Gordon at Durham ; but on 
2d thoughts, before any letters pass thorow his canall, I must ad- 
just some things with him as to the characters of some of the 
masters of ships that belong to these ports, for I do not think it 
prudent to act at random in a matter of such weight, and I will 
write to him very soon on that article. I have sent Mr. Waters 
notice how to address for me whilst I am in these parts, so that 
your commands will find me wherever I am. [After this I gave 
the King a full detail of the manner how the letters were seized, 
which having alreadie given ane account of, I need not transcrive 
that part of this letter.] 

" I wish to God the designd congress may terminate as you 
expect, but I cant help being affraid that the Emperor is too pa- 
cifically inclined, or does not think his present allyances suffi- 
cient to enable him to make head against the formidable powrs 
of the Hanover allyes, which are more united and zealous than 
he at first expected ; and yet at the same time tis scarce possible 
to imagine that the affairs of Europe can stand long in this 
posture. 

" You have no doubt accounts how matters go in Britain, in 
which I can give you no light in my present situation, nor do I 
know what to make of the Tory Lords applying so soon and so 
much to the new King : if he receives them, I wish it may not 
cool their zeal for a better cause. I am certainly informed of 2 
facts, viz. That Mar complains to some certain persons, of having 
lately been barbarouslie ill used ; (these are his own words, but 
I cant yet learn the particulars, tho I belive I soon will, and 
whither he complains particularly of you or of some in your ser- 
vice) and that he has applyed and has hopes of getting liberty 
to retire home to Alloway, there (as he sayes) to spend the rest 

Jl ...TOY 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 355 

of his dayes in privacie : of these particulars I was well assured 
before King George dyed. 

" Tis possitively affirmd by all hands that very soon there will 
be ane indemnity, and so extensive as to include many hitherto 
excluded, who probably will take the benefite therof : I reckon 
it cant fail to comprehend me, and in that case I belive I may re- 
turn soon home ; If I take this resolution I shall timouslie ac- 
quaint you therof that you may stop writing furder to me, for as 
I will be narrowlie watchd and the least occasion against me 
laid hold on, I must act with great caution, tho at the same time 
nothing shall deterr me from serving you in any station ; but I 
know you will excuse me, especially seing youl be provided in 
another corrispondent in all respects more capable to serve you 
than ever was in my powr. I am." 

The Kings affairs were in the melancholy posture I have re- 
presented when he heard of King Georges death. Nixt day 
therafter he set out in great hast and privacie for Lorrain, about 
which very time the Queen, on Invernesses being removed, and 
by the advice of her freinds, left the convent and was actually on 
her way from Rome to the King at Bollognia ; but the meeting 
was prevented by his having, before her arrival, set out on that 
journey which, by all I coud learn of it, was not of such conse- 
quence, that for the sake therof, he shoud have delayd the finish- 
ing of a reconciliation that was so earnestly desired by all who 
wishd him well and of such consequence to his charactar and 
his affairs. 

About this time I went from Aix la Chapelle to see my good 
old freind Colonel Clephan at Leige, not having the least suspi- 
cion of the Kings journey, for the news papers mentiond his 
having set out to meet the Queen, which it seems he gave out as 
a blind when he departed from Bollognia, and he travelld with 
such expedition and secresie that for some time no body coud 
tell wher he was or what he designd. When I came to Leige 

2z 2 



356 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

on the 4 of August, to my great surprise I found Allan Cameron 
at the inn wher I stopt: on my asking him how the King did, 
wher he was and what had brought himself there, he told me the 
King was not very far off, being at that time in Lorrain, that His 
Majestic had dispatchd couriers to Vienna and Madrid, and him- 
self to Paris, with directions to come nixt to me, and that Mr. 
Waters told him he enclosed what letters were for me under co- 
\ er to Dr. Bazin and knew no more of me ; so coming to know 
from the Doctor wher I was, he met with Clephan who told him 
he expected me in a day or 2 and he judged it better to wait for 
me there than go on to me at Aix. After which he delivered 
me this 

Letter from the King. 

" Nancy, July 22d 1727. 

" As soon as I heard of the Elector of Hanovers death I thought 
it incumbent on me to put myself in a condition of profiting of 
what might be the consequences of so great ane event, which I 
was sensible I coud never do at so great a distance as Italy ; and 
that made me take the resolution of leaving that country out 
of hand and drawing nearer to England, that I might be in a 
readiness, without loss of time, to profit of any commotion that 
might ensue in Great Britain or of any alteration that might 
happen in the present system of Europe in Hanovers death. At 
the same time that I left Italy I dispatchd expresses to Vienna, 
Madrid and Paris, and have alreadie received the return of that 
to Vienna, by which it is very plain that the Emperor woud be 
very desirous that I coud be in a condition of makino- ane at- 
tempt without any forreign force, and woud not even obstruct 
my own passing privately thro his dominions for that effect, tho 
his ministers declare at the same time that since the preliminaries 
are signd he cannot give me any assistance. 

" The answers from France and Spain are not yet come, but 
when they do, tis to be expected they will not be more favorable, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 357 

so that for the present no forreigne assistance can be expected ; 
but with all that, the present conjuncture appears so favorable 
in all its circumstances, that had I only consulted my own incli- 
nations, I shoud certainly out of hand have crossd the seas and 
seen at any rate what I coud do for my own and my subjects 
delivery ; but as on this occasion I act for them as well as my- 
self and cannot hope without their concurrence to succeed in 
what I may undertake in our mutual behalf, I find myself under 
the necessity of making no furder steps without ther advice. 

" Tis true the dissad vantages I lye under are great and many ; 
I have but a smal stock of rnony, scarce sufficient to transport 
what few arms I have and what officers I may get to follow me 
on this occasion. line sensible that it is nixt to impossible that 
a concert shoud be established amongst my freinds at home, such 
as woud be sufficient for a rising in arms in my favor before my 
arrival], and, by what is said before, the litle hopes of forreign 
assistance will be sufficiently seen ; but with all this, many ar- 
guments may be brought to authorize ane undertaking which at 
first sight might appear rash. Our countrie is now (whatever 
the outward appearance may be) in great confusion and dis- 
order, the people have had time to feel the weight of a forreign 
yoke, and are nowayes favorably inclind towards the present 
Elector of Hanover. That concert, vigor and unanimity which 
does not precede my crossing the seas may attend and follow 
such ane event, and if the cheif great powrs in Europe are not 
all my declared freinds, ther is not one that is my enimy and that 
lias not a particular interest to wish me on the throne; and were 
I in person in Britain at the head of even a small number of my 
own subjects, it might naturally alter very much the present sy- 
stem of some or other of them during the time of the congress ; 
but shoud it once meet and affairs be adjusted there on the 
foundation of the quadruple allyance, forreign affairs will take 
quite another face and in all probality woud long remain so, 



358 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

whilst the present Elector of Hanover and his son might have 
time to ingratiate themselves with the English nation : so that 
all put togather, it must be concluded that if the present con- 
juncture is slipd, it cannot be expected that wee ever can have so 
favorable a one for acting by ourselves and that wee run the risk 
of allowing the generall affairs of Europe to take such a turn as 
will probably incline most of the cheif powrs of Europe to be 
less favourable to us, than they are at present ; so that whatever 
is not absolutely desperate ought certainly to be undertakn and 
the sooner the better. 

" I desire therfore you may think seriouslie on this matter and 
let me have your opinion as soon as possible, and if my going 
into England be not adviseable, whither my going to the High- 
lands of Scotland might not be found proper. 

Postscript with the Kings own hand. 

" The contents of this will show you the confidence I have in 
you, and J expect you will let me know by the bearer Allan your 
advice and opinion particularly on this important occasion." 

This letter surprized me not a litle, and being unwilling to ex- 
press my sentiments theron singly to Cameron himself, I told him 
(after he acquainted me that he knew the contents of the Kings 
letter and his private inclinations and thoughts) that as it was a 
matter of vast importance, I inclined to communicate and con- 
sult with Clephan who was very capable to give advice and 
whose zeal was unquestionable : He replyd he had no orders to 
mention the affair to any but me, and on his finding me resolved 
to advise with the other he added that he was of the Marrian 
Faction and he woud not have any dealings with him ; I an- 
swered he was a man of true worth honor and loyaltie, and the 
reason he assignd against confirmd my resolution of consulting 
with him ; that I knew he was of no side but the Kings, and 
granting he had a personall kindness for Marr, I did not see that 
was any reason to seclude him, and that I coud not but think he 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 359 

and liis frauds -acted a very odd part in keeping up divisions at 
a juncture of such consequence when all hands were necessary; 
that as the King commanded me to transmit! my opinion to 
him, he certainly allowd me to take such measures as I judgd fit 
to enable me to give it, and he might for his own vindication 
acquaint His Majestie that I advised with Clephan, whither he 
woud or not ; and so I sent for him and told him all I knew. 
Cameron then told us that the King, notwithstanding the cer- 
tainty he had of no forreing aid, and that ther was no schem nor 
preparations at home, inclined and seernd resolved to repair to 
the Highlands of Scotland, and make the best stand he coud with 
such as repaird to him, and this measure was approved of by 
Lord Inverness and his other subjects attending him with whom 
he advised; and upon my enquiring if that Lord was with the 
King, he shifted giving a direct answer, but being put to it, he- 
said he was not actually present with him, but he keept at a litle 
distance so as His Majestie coud send often to him and have him 
when he pleased. Wee askt him if he belived the Highlanders 
woud rise heartily for or with the King, and if he thought the 
want of arms ammunition and mony to be transported alongst 
witli the King woud not be ane irreparable impediment: He 
answered that he coud not say they woud all rise in arms, but 
some certainly woud, and arms &c. might be sent in a litle time 
after the King, and lie did not doubt but he might be able to 
make a stand for some months at least, t told him that I ad- 
mired how he who knew the state of the Highlands and the ge- 
nerall concert and resolution of not going to the feild untill they 
saw England actually engaged, coud advise the King to throw 
away his person and expose the countrie and his trustiest freinds 
to certain destruction : that the King might indeed expect that 
some woud venture all in any undertaking wher His Majestie 
was personally present, but, as matters stood and as ther was 
no concert nor preparations, these woud not be numerous, so 



360 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

that the bulk of those that joind him woud be a parcell of idle 
fellows in hopes of plunder and who in time woud leave him to 
the mercy of the Goverments troops, which woud be pourd doun 
upon the Highlands and, under the praetext of the few that 
joind the King, destroy the countrie and cut off the inhabitants; 
for doing wherof twas well enuff known they wanted no more 
than such ane handle : and that I thought these councellors who 
gave such advice either did not know the true state of the Kings 
affairs or betrayd him, being wearied of his service, or in corri- 
spondence with his enimys. Cameron replyd the King was of 
another mind and keen to be at it, and wanted to know if Ide 
go with him ; and on his telling me that Lord Dunbar was in 
Italy attending the Prince, and Inverness was to remain on the 
continent to manage affairs with forreign powers, I answered that 
if the King commanded me to attend him I woud obey, tho I 
thought it a rash destructive undertaking, and that I shoud have 
had a much better opinion of the two last named Lords if they 
had thought fit to run equall hazard with the King in a project 
they so much approved. Clephan having also cxpressd his dis- 
like of the measure and givn unanswerable reasons against it, 
Cameron went off nixt day in his way to the King in Lorraiu 
and with him I sent the following- 
Letter to the King. 

" August 4, 1727. 

" Sir, Nothing coud have surprised me more than my acci- 
dentall meeting with the bearer, but the accounts I got from him 
of you and your late resolutions, being what indeed I did not in 
the least imagine or expect. Not being provided with my cy- 
phers in this place, twas with some difficultie I read yours, how- 
ever I made a shift well enuff to understand the purport, and 
the same reason will prevent my writing so clearlie as otherwise 
1 woud. 

" The subject of yours is a matter of the greatest importance, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 361 

and tho it was very naturall for you to desire to be in a condi- 
tion to make benefite from any happy circumstance that might 
occurr, yet I am much affraid nothing of that kind is likelyto hap- 
pen at this juncture. I have no intelligence from 'tother side of 
the sea, but by the publick letters tis plain that the people of 
England are intoxicated at present, having forgot their late ail- 
ments by the (ill grounded) hopes of a better management; and 
till they find themselves dissappointed I can form no hopes from 
them, especially seing you have no prospect of what you and all 
your advisers judged essentially necessary, even under the fairest 
veiws, for your support and the encouragement of others. And 
as for the other part of the countrie, they cant possibly do any 
thing without being provided with the many materiall things 
they want, and ere it can be done, much time and many difficul- 
ties must be surmounted, during which, opposite preparations 
will be made on all hands. I readily grant twere a notable ad- 
vantage to give the stroke in the beginning least affairs at home 
and abroad grow worse and be rivetted ; but then, even under 
this consideration, this is not to be attempted without necessary 
precautions and provisions : for without these, such or indeed 
any attempt woud be too desperate and without miracles from 
Heaven prove the utter ruin of all future hopes. I belive the 
people of Scotland are much as I left them, that is very well 
disposed; but withall so overrun and oppressed, that tis impracti- 
cable for them to do any thing but jointly and in concurrance 
with their neighbours of England ; and I am pritty well assured 
that notion is so establishd and fixed in their minds, that they 
will scarce on any event divert from it, so that all depends on 
the English ; and for you to venture over to either Scotland or 
England without ane absolute assurance of some support, may 
prove pernicious to yourself and fatall to all that wish you well. 
" I have with the bearer enterd into the particulars wheron I 
found these my sentiments, which he'l narrate and explain more 
VOL. ir. 3 A 



362 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

fully than I can write. No man living woud be more glad to 
see the dawning of a fair day ; but when every airth of the com- 
pass is black and cloudie, I cannot but dread very bad weather, 
such as can give no encouragement to a traveller, nay cannot well 
fail to prove hia own and his attendants utter ruin and destruc- 
tion. What I have represented is from the very bottom of my 
heart and soul, which at the same time I submitt with the greatest 
respect to your judgement." 

The King, on a reveiw of the state of his affairs and present 
prospect, perceiving he coud expect no assistance from abroad 
and finding so litle encouragement at home, laid aside his de- 
sign of going to Scotland; and so retiring from Lorrain, he went 
strait to Avignion, wher he proposed to remain under the Popes 
protection, which he obtaind, tho France desired him to with- 
draw and applyed to the Pope that he shoud be removed. Tis 
certain the King for a long time expected he might continue his 
residence there, and tho lie does not in any of the subsequent 
letters mention the reasons of his sudden removall, twas gene- 
rally belived that the French Court at last resolved it shoud and 
must be so, when the British ministers represented that the partie 
in the Parliament who were jealous of the French allyance, woud 
lay hold on the Kings residing in France as a handle to upbraid 
the Ministry, who being under the direction of the French were 
not to be exposed. What moved the King to be so desirous to 
reside there, when no benifite coud arise without the good will 
of the French Court attended it, I cant say, tho some there were 
who affirmd that it was with a veiw of being at a distance from 
the Queens freinds, which were numerous in Italy, and at libertie 
to recall Inverness : and I wish I had not too good reason to 
belive their conjecture was not altogether groundless. For a 
considerable time after the Kings departure from Lorrain no 
body knew what was become of him ; at last I received the fol- 
lowing 



nEGlSTBR OP LETTERS. 363 

Letter* from Sir John Grame. 

" Avignion, August 25, 1727. 

" The King desires me to acknowledge the receipt of yours of 
the 4 of August by Allan Cameron and also that of the 28 of 
July, which came by the post. The King takes very kindly your 
frank way of communicating your thoughts on his present situ- 
ation, but is perswaded that on reflection youl approve of the 
step he took in leaving Italy, upon the Duke of Hanovers death, 
which was absolutely necessary for his own vindication, and 
likewise of his resolution to stay here as long as he can, from 
whence I flatter myself it will not be easie to remove him with- 
out the Court of France breaks thorow the common rules of de- 
corum and show themselves intirely subservient to the English 
Goverment in every odious measure they think fit to enjoyn 
them. The King is very well pleased with the method you lay 
doun for his corrispondence with Scotland, but desires you woud 
learn the name of the person to whom letters are to be conveyd 
to Scotland after that affair is concerted and then inform him of 
it, which he thinks preferrable to writing to William Dundas in 
order to be informd of it from him. 

" The King was glad to hear from you that after strict enquiry 
you find ther was no treachery in the discovery of the packet you 
mention, tho sory for any accident that might have proved fatall 
to any of his freinds, especially you of whose attachment to the 
cause lie has had so many authentick proofs; but the King is 
hopefull such accidents will not happen for the future after the 
precautions you have takn to prevent them, and longs to have 
his correspondence with Scotland so fixd by your means as let- 
ters may go and come more safely and more frequently than they 
have done for some time past. 

" I reckon this will find you some wher in Flanders or near to 

* Received 6 September. 
3 A 2 



364 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

it, since I hear the Parliament has rose without passing ane act 
of indemnity. I shoud be glad of every event which might prove 
to your advantage, and as I shall be alwayes fond of serving you, 
you cannot do me a greater pleasure than by letting me know 
wherin I can be usefull to you, being alwayes readie to convince 
you as far as lyes in my powr how much I am Yours." 

Letter to Sir John Gra?me. 

" Aix, llth September 1727. 

Sir, Yours of the 25 of August was the more agreeable that 
it confirmd ane account I had read in a letter, 3 or 4 dayes be- 
fore, of the Kings being arrived in good health at Avignion: for 
in truth I was in pain to know what was become of him, having 
heard nothing that was probable from the time I parted with 
Cameron at Leige. No doubt many advantages attend his being 
near his own dominions, and I wish matters may be so adjusted 
as he may fix wher he is, till he comes nearer and that his family 
may join him, for I must own that nixt to the main point (that 
is his restoration) I know nothing more for the interest of the 
good cause than the encrease of the royall issue, which wee have 
reason to expect, were the royall pair once again togather and 
in a method of using the lawfull means. That and many other 
considerations render it extremely desirous that they shoud meet 
as soon as possible ; tis what his people long to have ane account 
of, and twill stop the mouths of his enimys. I woud very gladly 
have waited on His Majestic whilst he was within so near reach 
of me, but as I had neither his orders nor allowance, I chused ra- 
ther to cross my own inclinations, than do what perhaps he might 
not have approved of. 

" I know not how to undertake sending you notice of the per- 
sons name pitchd on to receive the Kings letters in Scotland, for 
at present I have no cyphers nor method of corrisponding there; 
and as Ime undetermined how or wher He dispose of myself 
nixt winter, I cant establish one for some time : what I writ to 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 365 

the Earls of Kincardine and Dnndonald was by a sure hand going 
from hence (tho by the bye I find he'l continue some litle time 
longer at London than I expected) and Ime to send the cypher 
with another that goes from this about a month hence, so that 
it will be yet a considerable time before this canall of corrispon- 
dence can be opened: but if the King has any scruple of being 
informd by William Dundas of the name of the person appointed 
to receive the letters he forwards, when once the correspondence 
is set afoot, he may demand it from the person he writes to. I 
must recommend earnestly, the keeping all the persons names 
any wayes employd in this corrispondence, as secret as possible, 
which in a great measure depends upon being within the know- 
lege of very few and that the intermediate persons know not of 
one another, which, as I have laid doun the scheme, may be 
done, if tis cautiouslie executed, as I belive it will. 

" As to myself, I see no probability of ane indemnity, it being 
put off till the new Parliament sits doun, and tis probable it may 
then meet with a new delay. I expect no particular favors (and 
as litle will I ask them) having been lately informd that my 
never failing personall freind the Duke of Argile his application 
was unsuccessful 1, being told by the English Ministry that they 
had clear proofs of a long tract of treason to charge me with. I 
was at a loss to know how this coud be, for tho I was assured 
Strahan and Corsar had loaded me to free themselves, yet I ima- 
gined theyd go no furder than to say that the packet that was 
seized was for me, which woud never have amounted to a proof of 
treason ; but by a letter which I lately received from my son, I 
find Corsars the greatest rogue of the 2, and that a certain person 
in the Government (to whose freindship I owed the intelligence I 
got so as to escape in time) told my son, they both deserved to 
be hanged as fools and knaves, having told what they shoud 
not and were under no necessity of telling: so that I conclude 
they have givn ane account of a setled corrispondence, and if they 



366 REGISTER OF LETTERS* 

have only brought me in and not made discoverys to the preju- 
dice of the cause or of other particular persons, I shall forgive 
them the sooner. What confirms the suspicion of Corsar is, that 
he declines letting any of our freinds know what lengths he went, 
keeping only in generalls and that he was obliged to save himself, 
since he had not been so wise as I was to keep out of the Go- 
verments hands. I have writ to my freinds and relations to show 
no resentment against them, least finding* themselfs treated as 
they richlie deserve, they become desperate and common prosti- 
tutes, which may have bad effects, as Captain Straton keept no- 
thing from them; besides tis commonly observed that these peo- 
ple do not confine themselves to truth, when once they give them- 
selves up to become informers and evidences. 

" There has been here for some months a countrieman and 
neer kinsman of mine, Samuel Forbes of Knapperlie, one of the 
most execrable villains Nature ever framed. He committed some 
7 or 8 years ago a most barbarous murder at Angiers on the per- 
son of Mr. a very worthy young English gentleman, and 
about 2 years ago as barbarous a robery of a Dutch gentleman 
who had invited and was intertaining him at his house. In short 
thers no size or kind of wickedness he is not capable of; and 
tho he's excluded the Hanover allyance, by being sure to be 
hangd if hes catchd within the territorys of the 3 cheif branches 
of it, that is France, Holland and Britain, yet his zeall is great for 
the present English Goverment (in hopes I suppose to get the re- 
mission which has been hitherto refused) and I lately discovered 
that he is actually in pay, whither to inform, or perform, or both, 
God knows, but he's a mettle resolute fellow and well qualifyed 
for all manner of villanous undertakings. I was mightie uneasie 
on his sudden setting out from hence about 3 weeks ago and not 
going to Spa, as he pretended, however he has again cast up here. 
If he happens to come wher you are at any time, for Gods sake 
cause secure him; Tis probable some of your company may know 



HEOJISTER OF LETTERS. 367 

liim, if not, all the description I can give of him is, that he's a 
well set, midle seized genteel man, of a ruddy complection, broad- 
faced and about 30 years old, and speaks French currently, and 
wears good cl oaths. I have talkd with some persons of distinc- 
tion here of him and theyr of opinion that if either the States Ge- 
neral or the French King woud demand him, he d be given up, 
as a publick enimy to mankind, by any Prince or States in whose 
dominions he hapned to be; and I have writ to one in Holland 
to put the gentleman he robbd upon making the tryall with the 
States, and I have also writ to Captain Frazer (who's now at An- 
giers) to acquaint Mr. Cotton (cusen to the gentleman that was 
murdered, who is also there) that in concurrance with the mas- 
ter of the accadamie he may apply to the French Court, and if 
any of these traps catch him, twill be a service to mankind. In 
short I dread him more than any body, as Ime sure he'l stand 
at nothing, be it ever so hainous, that the Goverment of England 
requires of him, and I thought it not amiss to put you on your 
guard. 

" I found poor Clephan in a very bad way at Antwerp, so I 
got him up to Leige where I setled him much better, but lies in 
so very bad a state of health and reduced so low and weak within 
these three weeks that a short time must end his days, and as he 
has nothing to subsist himself and supply his childeren, but what 
the King allows him, I fear he'l not leave wherwithall to bury 
him. Tis very obvious how much it is for the Kings honor and 

j 

service that the world know that he takes care of such persons, 
and Ime of opinion twoud be for his interest, thatheorderd Wa- 
ters to enquire after his condition during his sickness, and to let 
his son know that His Majestic will continue his pension after 
his death, so long, as to pay his funeralls. I mention this to you, 
and you can best judge how far twill be fit to mention this to 
His Majestic: if any thing is to be done for him, it must be soon, 
or twill come too late. His son is ane excellent young man and 



368 REGISTEU OP LETTERS. 

a fine scholar: he has studied medicine 2 years with Boerhaave, 
but as that bussiness is overstock! at home and the lad has no 
fund to subsist on, God knows what will become of him when 
his father dyes: If the King had any litle post about himself or 
the Prince to bestow on the deserving son of one of the worthiest jftfc* 
men ever existed, the extending his care to even the offspring of 
those that sufferd for him woud be a great encouragement to 
draw in others, particularly officers, to engage in his service on 
the nixt proper occasion. I also submit how far you judge it 
proper to mention this particular to His Majestic. 

" I have now takn notice of all that occurd to me at this time, 
which having spun this letter to a good length, I will encroach 
no fufder on your lime, than to assure you of the sincerity with 
which I am Yours. 

" P. S. The Duke of Berwicks to be here nixt week; he 
knows my story well enuff, and if he speaks to me of the King, 
I le be at a loss how to behave ; however, to be sure I do no harm, 
I will keep much in gencralls." 

Letter to Sir John Graeme. 

"18 September 1727. 

" Sir, Since my last of the ijth I have found a countrieman 
of ours, who at the bottom is a very honest man and not su- 
spected, and designs to be in Edinburgh in a month or therby ; 
with him I will write to Dundonald, desiring him as soon as he 
has pitchd on a person under whose cover are to be sent letters 
addressd to that he write a letter to the King acquaint- 

ing him of the name and address of that person, and that he send 
it with the first safe occasion to Robert Gordon at Bourdeaux or 
William Dundas at Rotterdam, and that the letters he sends under 
their cover be addressd to Monsieur Le Blan marchand a Paris. 
It will therfore be expedient that you in due time instruct Gor- 
don and Dundas how to forward such letters addressd for Le 
Blau, as come under their cover. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 69 

" I have been to wait on the Duke of Berwick, he received me 
with great civilitys, but as yet Ive had no private chat with him. 
I have nothing more to trouble you with at this time, but to de- 
sire youd tender my duty in the most respectfull manner to His 
Majesty, and belive that I am Yours." 

Letter * from Sir John Graeame. 

" 29 September 1727. 

" Sir, I had the honour to lay before the King yours of the 
ijth of September, who you may be sure longs more than any of 
his subjects to he with the Queen, on a great many accounts: 
but as it is still uncertain whither or not he will be allowd to 
remain here, it woud be hard to expose her to a long and trou- 
blesome journey, when perhaps before her arrivall he may be 
obliged to retire from hence, tho his intention has been all 
alongst to send for the Queen to join him as soon as he coud rea- 
sonably reckon on his fixing his residence here; to procure which 
he has left nothing undone either with the Court of France or 
that of Rome. The step the first of these Courts thought fit to 
take, was to pray the King to retire from hence, to which he re- 
fused to yeild, and having likewise solicited the Pope to interpose 
his authority, waits a return from him before they proceed any 
furder; but as the King very well foresaw that the French mi- 
nisters woud apply themselves to the Pope, the first thing he did 
on his coming here was to employ his credite at the Court to pre- 
vent the Pope in his favour, which has accordingly succeeded so 
well that he has good grounds to hope that the French solicita- 
tions will not prevaill, and if they do not, the Court of France I 
am confident must be hard put to it before they come to violence, 
it being certain that the article of the triple allyance which re- 
gards the King does not oblige them to it, without they make 
themselves such prostitutes to the English Goverment as to put 

* Received 10 October. 
VOL. II. 3 B 



370 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

any sense upon the treatic they think fit to impose on them. Ho- 
race Walpole is very assiduous in soliciting the French Court 
against us, which will probably take decisive measures one way 
or 'tother as soon as they have returns from Rome, which they 
may have in a few dayes, and so I shall end this account of the 
Kinffs situation. 

O 

" You may be sure the King woud have been very glad of 
seeing you when he was in your neighbourhead, but thinking- 
it woud be inconvenient for you to make that journey, he rather 
chose to send Allan Cameron to discourse with you on his affairs. 

" As to what you write of the Scots corrispondence, if I take 
your conceit right, it is absolutely necessary that either William 
Dundas or some body else, thorow whose hands it is to pass on 
this side of the sea, have ane address from Scotland, under which 
he is to put what letters he receives for Robert Anderson in 
Dingwall; and as it is to be wishd that corrispondence were set 
on foot as soon as possible, that they may send that address to 
Dundas by the first occasion, wherof I shall take care to be in- 
formd by him, that so the King may have it in his powr to em- 
ploy another shoud this channell be thought impropper on ac- 
count of his being too much suspected by the Goverment. And 
as to secrecie, I he Kings Scots freinds may depend on its being 
inviolable, and I am confident their own safely will make them 
lake all necessary precautions for preserving it at home in the 
manner the King has proposed to them. 

" I am stunnd with the new accounts you give me of Corsar 
and Strahans behaviour, who since they have been privy to so 
long a tract of corrispondence, you acted a very prudent part in 
desiring your freinds to conceall their resentment against them. 

" Wee are upon such a footing here that no body can enter the 
toun without our knowlege; but as Forbes, shoud he take it 
in his head to come hither with ane ill design, will probably 
change his name and his country, I wish you had givn us some 

.H .jo i- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 31 \ 

marks how to know him: But however I shall be on my guard 
and thank you heartily for the hint you have givn me about him. 

" Collonel Clephans bad state of health is mortifying news to 
me, and the King who is sensibly touched at it has thought fit to 
order Mn Waters to pay as far as 500 livres, which the King de- 
sires you to call for to be employd on the honest gentlemans fu- 
neralls and for payment of any of his most pressing debts. As to 
his son, I am sory to tell you that I cannot at present see how he 
can be employd about the Kings or the Prince of Wales persons, 
besides that I shoud think his coining to join the King either here 
or in Italy woud be the way to lose him, since it woud hinder 
him from pursuing the business he has been bred to ; but you 
may be sure the King will alwayes have a regard for Clephans 
childeren as far as his circumstances will allow him. 

" I can say nothing to you as to the Duke of Berwick, further 
than that for some years past a few letters of compliment have 
past betwixt the King and him, but I dont know how far he 
woud be a thorow freind, were ther any occasion for his services. 

" I wish you all health aud happiness, and shall be fond to live 
with you allwayes in the same freindship which was betwixt 
our fathers, being with the most sincere and heartie attachment 
Yours." 

Letter * from Sir John Graeme. 

" October 6, 1727. 

" Sir, I was glad to find by yours of the 18 September, which 
I had the honor to read to the King, that a good opportunity has 
offered for your writing to the Earl of Dundonald, to desire him, 
as soon as he has pitched upon the proper person for the convey- 
ance of letters, to acquaint the King of the said persons name 
and address, and I shall write by nixt post to William Dundas 
and Robert Gordon how they are to forward to the King what 

-, , . " " 

* Received 17 October. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

letters thev receive addressd to Monsieur Le- Blan merchant at 

t 

Paris. You will see, by what I have writ to you on Monday 
last, that upon your having mentioned that you had no safe way 
of writing to Scotland, I found a necessity of using the method 
you first proposed of being informed by Dundas of the person 
in question, but it is certainly better- to have ii directlie from 
Earl of Dundonald himself. 

" I acquainted you in my last of the Kings having ordered 
Mr. Waters to pay to you as far as 500 livres for poor Collonel 
Clephans funeralls, but having since had a letter from that ho- 
nest gentleman wher he begs the Kings permission to go home 
to breath native air, as what is most likely to prolong his dayes, 
the King, in consideration of his loyall principles and faithfull 
services, being unwilling to cross his inclinations, desires youd 
call for the above mentiond sum r which he is pleased to allow 
for the expences of his journey to Scotland. 

" I shall be glad to have your sentiments of the Duke of Ber- 
wick after you have had some private conversation with him. 

" I am with great sincerity Yours." 

Letter to the King. 

" October 7, 1727. 

" Sir, Before this reaches you, I suppose a letter from the 
Bishop of Rochester will have come to your hands, acquainting 
you of the substance of what is herein containd, which I had 
breiflie communicated to him, because I coud not then write at 
full length to you and judgd it necessary that both you and he 
shoud be somewhat apprizd of the matter as quicklie as possible. 

" To proceed then, I received lately information from a parti- 
cular freind, that he was assured that the Ministry at London 
were masters of coppys of most if not all the cyphers by which 
you and such as are employd under you corrispond with your 
freinds in Britain or elsewher, and that by one of these they 
iiucyphered the letters lately seized in Scotland, and that amongst 



IVEGISTER OP LETTERS; 313 

otl>er tilings they containd the following particulars : that after 
owning the receipt of 2 letters of certain dates, directions are 
givn with relation to the Scots episcopall clergy ; that notice is 
givn of ane invasion designd, with directions to prepare for it; 
that a person was or woud be soon sent to a certain place on 
purpose to give orders, with whom the person for whom the let- 
ter was designd was to correspond, and further he was to act in 
concert with 2 other persons, which 3 were to give such direc- 
tions in all matters as they judgd most proper for the good of the 
cause from time to time, as circumstances hapned and required., 
My author does not mention the name of the 3 aforesaid persons 
nor of the aforesaid place, but from what follows, their names* 
at least of the 2 to be advised with, is known. He sayes that 
these cyphers came from the fountain-head abroad; that the 
Ministry have had them for some time waiting for ane occasion 
to use them ; that they keep this as a secret in the hands of very 
few, but that his informer had access to know such tilings and 
told them to him, as he imagines with a good intention, and that 
thers scarce any the least reason to doubt the truth of the informa- 
tion. My corrispondent adds that his freind told him that Stra* 
han and Corsar at their secret examinations had told all they 
knew, (and which they, had not the confidence to deny when 
since being liberate, they were questend on it) particularly that 
you, had for a long time keept a close corrispondence in. Scotland j 
which was carrydon by me who receivd and retumd letters and 
orders relating therto, and gave severall particular instances ther- 
of; that, this affair was fully debated in the cabinet councell in 
presence of the late Elector of Hanover ; that some were earnest 
to proceed against the 2 aforsaid persons (whose, names it seems 
they knew) and endeavour therby to make further discoverys> 
but that the Elector was possitive against it, saying that since 
the person cheiflie concernd in the corrispondence was escaped 
and the danger, by the prospect of peace, over, lied have no 



374 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

more blood nor prosecutions, so that these 2 persons woiul not be 
troubled unless fresh reasons occurrd. My corrisporident adds 
that after a long discourse with his freind, he was again possi- 
tively assured by him of the Ministrys being posesst of every 
cypher you have writ by these several years past, which they had 
got from one that knew how to be master of them ; and he con- 
cludes that tis highlie necessary you be apprizd Iherof as soon as 
possible, and that if you do not alter your cyphers but continue 
to write by the former, the consequences may prove fatall to your 
own and your freinds interest. Thus, sir, you have the main ar- 
ticles containd in my letter, and Ime very sure my freind, in 
whom I can assuredly confide, Avoud not have transmitted this 
account in such hast and expressd so much concern if he had 
not judgd it essentially necessary. He does not mention the name 
of his informer, but from some particular circumstances I guess 
who it may be, and if so, I imagine the authority is too too good: 
however as wee have heard of politicians pretending to know 
more in such cases than they realie do, with a veiw of creating 
suspicions and raising jealousies, what is mentioml will not war- 
rand any particular persons being thought culpable tho thers 
more than enuff to put you on the search and to lay down mea- 
sures to prevent the fatall effects of the informations being true : 
of which I conceive it is in your power t make a pritty good 
judgment, for if you have coppys of the letters that were 
seized in February last at Leith, and on a reveiw find that they 
contain all or most of the particulars I have mentiond, (which 
by the bye is not pretended to be more than the heads and sub- 
stance of some parts of these letters and not the precise words) 
then you may reasonably conclude that the informations good; 
and on the other hand if these letters containd nothing relative 
to these particulars, it may as reasonably be concluded that tis a 
contrivance of your enimys ; but such a scrutiny seems to be ab- 
solutely necessary towards discovering either the fallacy or the 



OF LETTERS. 375 

treason, which may pave the way to find out the traitor ; matters, 
all of them of the last consequence to your and the common 
cause. 

" I take it for granted that on this allarum you will not blame 
me for having- stopt the cypher you directed me to send to Scot- 
land, for if this information is true and it has ever been used with 
other persons on former occasions, tis by no means fit to put it in 
your freinds hands. He be impatient to know your sentiments of 
this matter, and I remain Yours." 

Letter* from the King. 

" October 24, 1727. 

" The Bishop of Rochester sent me the letter you lately sent 
for his information, and I own to you it did not give me much 
uneasiness, for I was very sure of my secrets while Inverness 
served me, and I hope I am not now less so, tho I have not the 
same personall knowledge and experience of Sir John Graeme 
which I had of him. But your letter of the 7th of October puts 
me intirely at ease as to that matter, since it is supposed to you 
that in the letters intercepted in Scotland severall particulars 
shoud have been mentioned which I knew were not, so that your 
informer either deceives you or is deceived himself. The English 
Goverment of late lias been very solicitous to make people be- 
live that my secrets are betrayd, since they are sensible that such 
a perswasion must creat great diffidence towards me and by con- 
sequence much distress my affairs, and therfore it must alwayes 
be of use to me to be able to remove such jealousies, as in this 
one particular is sufficiently done by what I now tell you ; but 
it may be of use to me to know who was the person that gave 
you these informations, and I wish you coud learn from him who 
was his informer and the way that it is pretended that the En- 
glish Goverment got my cyphers and what particular ones they 

* Received 12 November. 



.T76 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

pretend to have. In the mean time I see no difficultie in your 
forwarding the cypher to Scotland I sent you, since it is a new 
one, and you may certainly be entirely at ease on all these mat- 
ters. Tho I desire you woud continue to give me a particular 
account of what comes to your knowledge of this nature, since 
one way or other I may he able to make good use of these 
lights. 

v \ belive you will be glad to know that i saw so litle appear- 
ance of my removing from here [Avignion] that I have sent for 
the Queen to corne here ; but I intend to leave my sons \vher 
they are till spring, on account of the season of the year. 

" Sir John Graeme left this yesterday; I dont exactly know 
how long he may be away, but during his absence, what letters 
you may send here for him will come directly to my hands, and 
I will take care to answer them. Jf ever you have occasion to 
write to his father let him know the good opinion I have of his 
son as well as himself. 

" I thank God I keep my health very well in this country, 
and have no more at present to add but the assurance of my con- 
stant 'kindness." 

Letter to the King. 

*< November 18, 1727. 

" Sir, Yours of the 24 of October I had the honor to receive 
some few dayes ago in this place [Rotterdam] whither I came 
lately from Aix la Chappie with a design to take up my winter 
quarters till I see what turn affairs at home will take. I was 
lately assured that the Goverment had resolved to pass ane act 
of indemnity, .excluding only such as are attainted, and a litle 
time will now show what truth is in it. 

" I arn extremely glad that you have such reasons to belive the 
information I had of your being betrayd is not, at least in all its 
heads, true, which I own is a very naturall consequence to draw 
from the letters that were seized not containing the particulars 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 377 

I acquainted you were pretended to be discovered in them : but 
at the same time I cannot rest fully satisfyed when I consider 
from whence my information came. I will alwayes receive your 
commands with a dutifull submission, but I hope you will not 
insist on my mentioning names, after I acquaint you that the 
account was sent me under strict engagements to the contrary, 
and because I cant see it will be of any great use, after repre- 
senting the following particulars. My immediat author is a gen- 
tleman whos charactar and profession does not lead him to deall 
at all in politicks, and he accordingly is reckond one who thinks 
ho furder of such matters than to submit and live peaceably 
under the prevailing Goverment for the time ; but nevertheless I 
know him assuredly to be a very honest man and a sincere well 
wisher to you and your interest : he happens to be in a state of 
great intimacie with one who enjoys a considerable post and is 
much trusted, especially in such matters as concern Scotland, and 
I can scarcely think any minister woud impose false stories on him, 
and am very sure he d scorn to propogate and disperse them on any 
account or veiw whatsoever. The first of these being my very good 
freind, and the other no wayes a personall enimy to me, I hapned 
one day to be the subject of their private conversation, which 
led the last to mention what my freind coud not but credite, when 
he reflected on the charactar of his author and the way and man- 
ner he spoke of it to him, which out of respect first to you and 
nixt to me he thought himself bound to inform me of, in the 
manner and under the restrictions I have mentioned in this and 
my former letter. This person being my sons intimate acquaint- 
ance, I shall put him on trying if he can make further discoverys 
with regard to the sevrall particulars you want to have cleared 
and what else may be for your service in this matter : what may 
be the success I cant say, but I shall be sure faithfully to com- 
municate all I learn, and slioud think myself happy in being in- 

VOL. II. 3 C 



378 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

strumentall in removing all doubts, on what ever side of the ques- 
tion truth lyes. 

" Finding when I came here last week a very safe and proper 
hand to convey your cypher to Earl of Dundonald, I resolved 
not to slip so good ane occasion by waiting for your return to 
my last, so I sent it off with a gentleman who saild yesterday 
with a fair wind directly for Leith, and Ime in no pain of the 
trusts being soon and carefully executed. 

" Ime pleased the affair of your residence is fixed according 
to your mind, and with all my soul I wish you and the Queen 
a mirry meeting and much mutuall lasting comfort, as I will al- 
wayes join with others your good subjects in detesting those mis- 
creants that have been any way accessory towards promoting and 
continuing a misunderstanding so fatal and pernicious to yourself, 
your family and subjects; and I cannot but offer it as my humble 
advice that all prudent means be takn to prevent the like for the 
future, it being impossible to express the prejudice it did and 
woud do to your service many many wayes. 

" I have nothing more to trouble you with at present, but to 
renew my protestation of being in the most respectfull and sin- 
cerest manner Yours." 

Letter* from the King. 

" November 16, 1727. 

" I have seen for some time past so litle appearance of my being 
molested here this winter, that tho the season of the year was too 
far advanced to send for my childeren, yet I sent for the Queen 
to come here, giving her such lights, directions and encourage- 
ments as were sufficient to dissipate any apprehensions she might 
have in relation to her passage on account of the conduct the 
French are obliged to hold in publick on this occasion towards 

Received November 28. 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 379 

hie ; but all I coud say or do coud not prevail upon her to come, 
and by the circumstances which have preceeded and attended 
that refusall it is easie to see that Cardinal Alberoni and her other 
directors are resolved never to want a pretence to prevent a solid 
union betwixt us and to make use of her in the mean time to 
distress my affairs as much as possible : had she come now, it 
might have been a great means to have fixed me here, as I much 
apprehend her remaining in Italy may not a litle facilitate the 
endeavours of those who wish me removed. I desire you will 
find means to transmit this account of my present situation to 
my freinds in Scotland, and have nothing to add to it but the 
assurance of my constant kindness. You will let James Clephan 
know I have received his letter of the jst to Sir John Graeme and 
that I am much concernd for the death of his worthy father, 
whose merite was known to none better than my self, and that 
I shall be as kind to his family as my circumstances will allow. 
If I can I will continue the half of his pension to his son James. 
I am Yours." 

Next day after I received this letter at Rotterdam, the Lady 
Southesque (who designing to return to Scotland had waited in 
this place since July for a pass from the British Goverment, be- 
cause of her having conversed with the Kings family at Rome) 
got a letter in its due course from the Queen at Bollognia, ac- 
quainting her that the King had indeed sent to desire she woud 
forthwith repair to him at Avignion, but that she had declined 
the journey at this time for the following reasons; 1st, that she 
did by no means think her childeren in such good hands as she in 
prudence and kindness coud leave them; 2dly, that the Cardinal 
Polignac had lately notifyed to the Pope that his master the 
French King had given orders to seize and stop her if so be she 
enterd into his dominions with a design of repairing to the King 
whilst he remaind at Avignion, and her freinds did not approve 
of her running the hazard of a tryall whither or not the French 



380 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

King; was in earnest; Lastly, on a surmise that the Earl of Inver- 
ness was as much as ever in the Kings favor and in a litle time 
woud be recalld, the Cardinal Legate of Bullognia had writ, ear- 
nestly desiring His Majestic woud satisfye the Queen in that ar- 
ticle, which he declining to do, gave her too good reason to ap- 
prehend that it might probably come to pass when they were al- 
togather at such a distance from her freinds in Italy and she had 
no person to advice with and countenance her. Her Majestic 
therfore, from the danger to which her person woud be exposed 
and the badness of the season, desired the King woud excuse her 
attempting the journey at that time and till it appeard how mat- 
ters were likely to cast up. Tis observable that the King takes 
no notice of these reasons which the Queen assignd, but woud 
have the account of her refusing to join him, dispersed in Britain, 
with a design, as is too probable, of making it appear with a bad 
grace in the opinion of his people. I was extremely concerned 
to find the King so deaf to the advices and intreaties of his freinds 
and so wedded to his favourites as to continue schaemes so de- 
structive to his interest and honor; and as I had lately advice 
from London that their were some hopes of my being at libertie 
to return home, after which I coud corrispond no more, I resolved 
to discharge my duty in laying before His Majestic what occurrd 
to me, from a reveiw of his by past conduct, to be the cause of 
many events directly repugnant to the welfare of the good 
cause and his own private satisfaction, which I fully did in the 
following 

Letter to the King. 

" December 6, 1727. 

" Sir, I received yours of the 1 6 November with infinite sor- 
row and concern, as it superseded the hopes I had conceived of 
the fatall differences of your family having been so far adjusted 
that nothing materiall remaiud to obstruct your and the Queens 
living togather in a way and manner which did become your 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 381 

mutuall relation to each other, and so necessary with regard to 
your other temporal! concerns. As to transmitting accounts to 
your freinds in Scotland of her having refused to come to you, 
tho so earnestly desired, and of the reasons which you think have 
moved her therto, I am humbly of opinion it is by no means for 
your service to make any publick noise about it, till it be seen 
what maybe brought about this winter; for I beg the liberty to 
say that the memorialls, letters, &c. that were first and last handed 
about concerning this unhappy breach, did you no Utle disser- 
vice, were it for no more than that they gave rise for your eni- 
mys to enquire more officiouslie into the story and occasiond its 
being too much the subject of common conversation, wherin your 
enimys vented their malice against you, and in many articles 
your freinds did not well know how to answer them, especially 
those by which the Lord and Lady Inverness were accused. 
The world at present belives that the breach was so far made 
up, that the Queen left the convent and proceeded to Bollognia 
to co-habit with you ; that your not meeting then was occasioned 
by your sudden unexpected journey, and that the uncertainty of 
your residence prevented her joining you last summer, as the 
coldness of the season does now: and with great submission I 
conceive you shoud rather suffer it to rest there than assign any 
other reasons for some litle tract of time : This present footing on 
which it stands can give rise to no bad inferences, and tis time 
enuff to propale the secrets of your family when all hopes of bet- 
tering them are intirely blasted. 

" Having now entered on this subject, indulge me so far as 
to allow me freelie to lay before you my sentiments with regard 
to the management of your affairs : in doing wherof I may per- 
haps differ from what on former occasions you have signifyed to 
be your own opinion, and I may condemn some parts of your 
conduct and ofler some expedients which at first veiw may be 
dissagreeable to you, but I hope in none of these will I incurr 



382 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

your displeasure, as I have no veiw whatsoever but your honof 
and service, and that what mistakes I may commit arise wholly 
from ane error of judgement rather than wilfull intention ; and 
in this I have the vanity to expect youl be pleased to credite me, 
as Inie sure no part of my behaviour these 25 years bypast, that 
I enterd into publick affairs, will admit the least shadow of rea- 
son to think I postponed your or my countries service to any veiw 
or interest whatsoever, and that I can propose no benefite to my 
self from what I may represent, as I have no earthly dependance 
upon any person or cause but you and yours, and as I cant pre- 
tend any particular dissobligation from any person that has been 
or may be concernd in your affairs. This being premised, I beg 
libertie to say that in my humble opinion you have been ill served 
ever since 1716 that you returnd from Scotland, and that much 
of this is to be imputed to your lodging too much powr and 
confiding as it were solely in a single person. Mankind are na- 
turally ambitious of powr, and when they attain to more than 
that to which they have ane inherent title, they think theirs no 
way to secure the posession, but by grasping at more and keep- 
ing their fellow creatures at under : and hence it is that favourites 
are constantly the bain of those princes by whose authority they 
are raised and supported, seing this cant be done but by sup- 
pressing others, who belive and very often have ane equall if not 
a superior claim to their soveraigns confidence and bountie and 
cant bear the insolence that for the most part attends the dominion 
of these substitute princes. Whilst the Duke of Mar was your first 
minister, how, as it was said, did he lord it over all the rest of your 
followers, men, some of them, equall to him in dignity, power, 
knowledge, and all of them, according to their severall stations, 
in zeall, fidelity and sufferings for the royall cause ? No person 
was to be employd in the highest or lowest station, no favors 
conferrd, in short nothing to be done in any kind of matter but 
by and thorow him : hence it came to pass that a parcell of his 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 383 

creatures were preferrd to persons of greater rank and merite, 
which so sowred ther tempers, that ther arose a generall clamor 
against his administration, and great numbers of your best and 
most valuable subjects withdrew from your Court, which gave a 
handle to your enimys to upbraid your freinds for having adhered 
to a prince who, as they turnd it, valued their sufferings for him 
at so low a rate. The Duke, being sensible that such woud be 
the issue of this kind of management, took care to represent 
those people as factious and humoursome, and I can remember 
very well that in your letters about that time in praise and justi- 
fication of him, you seemd to think that under the pretence of 
being displeased at his administration they levelld at your own 
authority, being prompted by the secret cunning artifices of your 
enimys. No sooner was His Grace of Mar removed, and Lord 
Inverness established his successor, but, as tis said, he folio wd the 
same measures, nay in conjunction witli his Lady and her brother 
the Lord Dunbar, very far out did what was laid to his predeces- 
sors charge, in so far as he brought even the Queen herself on the 
stage: I know very well you did him the honor to vindicate him 
in a very publick manner, which, had it been practable, woud 
have cleared him of the charge ; but so it is, that when people 
considered that it was not to be imagined but he had the pru- 
dence not to do any thing unbecoming him in your presence and 
woud certainly deny the accusation to you, but that persons of 
rank and figure, of honor and loyaltie, and attachment to your 
person who were amongst your attendants and others who 
hapned to be in the neighbourhead all joind in the tesstimony 
against him and concurrd in the particular facts and circum- 
stances, which they averrd consisted within your proper know- 
ledge ; when these proofs, I say, were duely weighd, they so pre- 
posessd the minds of the far greater part of your subjects, as well 
as strangers, that nothing alledged in his behalf had credit with 
them, and nothing was or is more frequently heard than that 



384 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

your affairs will not prosper whilst he has any concern in them. 
Now, sir, that your family is miserably divided; that great 
numbers of those who followd your fortune have withdrawn 
highly discontented, so that your present retinue is exceedingly 
reduced with respect both to the number and charactar of those 
of whom it does consist ; that the prudence and capacity (to 
say no worse) of many you have employd are much calld in 
question ; that your freinds all the world over are highly discou- 
raged, are all truths undenyable ; and from what source can they 
proceed but that which is universally assigned, viz. the arbitrary 
proceedings of those who've had the good fortune to gain your 
good opinion, so far as to be solely trusted by you ? Most of these 
particulars consist of facts that speak for themselves, within the 
reach of your own observations and knowledge ; and for what 
remains, whoever takes on him to set them in another light, I 
will be bold to say he is either some litle insignificant creature 
who knows litle of whats doing in the world, or he's a tool to 
some designing person interested in the scheme. I know you 
impute the part which the Queen has acted, to the artifices of 
certain persons, who aim therby at embroiling your family and 
embarrassing your affairs : and I think I have seen it under your 
hand that you did not belive she was apprised of these ther secret 
veiws and motives, in which I belive every body will concurr ; 
for tis impossible to imagine that a princess of honor and virtue 
and endowed with naturall bowells of affection (altho she had no 
personall regard for you) woud contenance and support such 
measures as tend directlie to ruin her childeren ; and it is as dif- 
ficult to conceive that a princess of common sense and discretion 
coud be so much imposed on as in this case must be supposed ; 
for tho these evill councellors might have such wicked designs, 
how is it possible they coud perswade her that with her eyes and 
ears she saw and heard these insolencies of which she complains, 
and which she assigns as the cause of her retirement, if no such 



HEGISTER OF LETTERS. S85 

had liapned ? To conclude, tis impossible to imagine her imme- 
diatly or medially guilty of such pernicious measures, without 
at the same time supposing her the worst or the weakest of wo- 
mankind, charactars I never yet heard of her and diametrically 
opposite to what is universally established. I will not take on me 
to say that what is thus alledged against one or both these persons 
that have been at the head of your affairs are all or in part true, 
because I have no personall knowledge therof, but certain it is they 
are generally credited, and I submitt to you if it is not possible that 
you may be misinformed of the conduct and behaviour and be mis- 
taken in the good opinion you intertaind of both as well as one of 
these ministers? and if it is not difficult to belive that so many 
persons, in all respects of unblemishd charactars, shoud act so 
base a part as to affirm notorious falsehoods in ane affair of such 
moment ? On the supposition then that what is above represented 
are reall matters of fact, arising from the causes assignd, tis na- 
turall to subsume that what has hapned woud have been pre- 
vented, had you thought fit to appoint particular provinces to 
particular persons, confiding and advising with them as they 
were severally employd, and confining them within there sevrall 
spheres : by such a distribution of offices of business and posts 
of honor, without regard to dependance on or attachment to any 
person but yourself, youd have found yourself better served, 
peace and harmony preserved in your family, your Court ap- 
peard with greater splendor, and the reputation of your councills 
been on a better footing than I apprehend they are, at present. I 
own that in the management of your secret dispatches and ne- 
gotiations tis absolutely necessary to committ them to very few, 
nay if possible to only one person ; but it does not follow that 
thers any necessity for exalting him in powr and dignity above 
others. 

" If what I have thus, with great submission, offerd to your 
consideration appear to you founded on truth and reason, the re- 
medy, in so far as concerns your future (Economy in appointing 

VOL. II. 3 D 



386 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

v 

by whom and after what manner you'r to be served, is plain and 
obvious, and I humblie apprehend thers not much greater diffi- 
cultie in adjusting matters with the Queen, which I take to be 
the unum necessarium at present; for since she is not accesory 
or even privy to any bad designs against you or your affairs, and 
that she assigns no other reason for her retirement, but that she 
coud no longer bear what she reckoned insulting injuries from 
Lord and Lady Invernes, and that to satisfye her in that article 
you was graciouslie pleased to remove him from attending you 
personally, nothing remains but that you condescend one step 
further, in giving her your royall assurance that you have no 
design of bringing him ever back to your service; and allow me 
so far to plead her cause, that if she had reason to demand his 
being removed, she has as good reason to expect you will not 
call him back: for my part I cannot allow myself to think you 
have any such design, for sure youl never put the satisfaction of 
your royall consort, the mother of your childeren, and the peace 
and tranquillity of your family in the ballance with any subject 
whatsoever, tho endowed with all the qualitys of the greatest mi- 
nister that ever served a crownd head; and let people say and 
think Avhat they will of Lord Inverness, I cant but intertain a 
better opinion of his sense, honor and integrity, than to imagine 
he has any such veiws. You may with good reason think that 
your removing him to gratifye the Queen is enuffto satisfye her; 
but since the world hath takn it into their heads that he's still 
so much in your favor that in some time youl probably recall 
him (which imagination I presume has its rise from the publick 
declarations you emitted in his favors) and that no doubt these 
reports have reachd the Queen, tis not very strange' they shoud 
allarum one of her sex, who are naturally timorous and credolous ; 
and if her being satisfyd by you on that head will remove all 
impediments to your living happily togather, tis a blissing pur- 
chassed at too easie a rate to be rejected. I have no immediat 
authority to say that herein lyes the main obstruction of the 

.If 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 387 

Queens not repairing forthwith to you, but at the same time I 
have very good reason to belive it, from what I collected last 
summer from forreigners of note and distinction who wish you 
very well; and if it is realie so, your further condescension on that 
head will either have the long wishd for effects or leave her with- 
out any sort of excuse, so as the world will assuredly condemn 
her and justifye you. I can easily conceive that you will think 
it hard to have terms, such as these, imposed on you : but be 
pleased to reflect how many princes seated on their thrones have 
been constraind to dismiss ministers with whom they were well 
pleased, on less pressing occasions, and to obtain less valuable 
ends: be pleased likewise to call to mind how much Lewis 13th 
of France was blamed for supporting even the great Cardinal 
Richleiu when his insolence towards the Queen Mother obliged 
her to leave first his Court and then his dominions; and sure 
thers more to be said in favors of a royall consorts complaints 
against any minister whatsoever. And after all, what is ther in 
this Lord that shoud enduce you to be possitive in this matter? 
you may dismiss him in a way honorable to yourself and him, since 
you think he merits so much for his fidelity and services, and you 
will not want others to supply his place whose capacity and ex- 
perience in business, whose charactars and reputations, whose 
powr and interest at home and abroad are at least equall to His 
Lordship and are consequently equally capable to serve you. If 
you dread his resentment may turn to revenge and lead him to 
discover your secrets, that is at once to own he never deserved the 
confidence you ve reposed in him, and the sooner you get rid of 
him the better, seing in that case ther can be no security of him 
at any rate: but for my part, I cant allow my self to entertain 
the least notion that he can possibly be guilty of so much trea- 
chery and ungratitude, and I dare say you and all your subjects 
may be perfectly secure on that head. 

" To sum up all I have said on this article, if the peace of 



388 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

your family can be obtaind at so easie a rate, tis expected that 
injustice to yourself, your posterity and your people, you will be 
pleased to comply with it and therby shew yourself a loving hus- 
band, a kind parent and a gracious soveraign, evidencing at the 
same time a notable instance of your goodness, wisdom and pru- 
dence. 

" Now that I have finishd this tedious epistle, Ime much at a 
stand whither or not to forward it, least I incurr your displeasure 
by presuming to express my sentiments on subjects to high for 
me, and yet I resolve to venture, as Ime conscious of my own ho- 
nest intentions and certain that your innate goodness is more 
than enuffto pardon the failings of your subjects. 

" I have acquainted Mr. Clephan of what you design to do 
for him, and as it is ane act of generosity becoming a great prince, 
1 dare say it will have very good effects, tho whilst he remains in 
the Dutch service it must be keept very secret. I am Yours.'* 

Letter * from the King. 

" December 19, 1727. 

" Yours of the 1 8 November came safe to me. I need say no- 
thing more in relation to secrets discovered, since I am perfectly 
easie on that head and ought to be so considering the intelligence 
I have had on these matters, which have not been fully explaind 
to me. 

" I am returning in a few dayes to Italy, for very good reasons 
as you may belive. I wish you coud find a way of letting the 
people of Scotland know of my leaving this country [Avignion]. 
I find you mentiond something to the Bishop of Rochester of em- 
ploying a person to carry my letters thither, but I shoud think 
that method lyable to accidents: I wish you woud write me your 
thoughts fully on these matters, that I may be able to take some 
party for selling a correspondence with that country. 

* Received January 5, 1728. 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 389 

" I desire you will tell Generall Hamilton that I received his 
letter of the 20th November. I am impatient to be in a condi- 
tion to send him some releife, which I certainly shall do as soon 
as ever I can. Let me hear sometimes from you, and be assured 
of my constant kindness." 

Letter to the King. 

" January 22, 1728. 

" Sir, I delayd making a return to yours of the 19 December, 
which I had the honour to receive, till the arrivall of a ship from 
Scotland, which I knew was to bring me letters from my freinds 
and might perhaps afford me matter to write of to you. 

" Ime sorry you r obliged to remove your quarters, seing it is 
what you did not incline to, altho wee at a distance and ignorant 
of your secret veiws coud not see any great advantage arising 
from your residing at Avignion, unless it was attended with the 
concent and further good intentions of the French Court. 

" All your freinds will rejoice to hear of your meeting with 
the Queen. Since the fatall breach hapned I have fairlie and 
honestlie represented what effects it had on the minds of your 
people, and I will take upon me to say nothing ever hapned that 
did you so much disservice, nor is there any thing more neces- 
sary for you, than by all reasonable means to prevent any mis- 
understanding for the future: such unnaturall divisions afford 
your enimys (of all kinds) ane handle to represent you in the 
worst light they can devise, and your freinds are not a litle de- 
jected by them: How much then it imports yourself, your family, 
the good cause and your faithfull subjects, that you henceforth 
live togather in such a manner as is decent and at the same time 
necessary, is so very obvious, that it is not to be imagined any 
consideration will come in competition therwith, and this I am 
sure is the opinion and earnest wish of all who, being free of 
passion and self-veiws, have a just and dutifull regard for you ; 



390 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

and who ever represents otherwayes (if any such ther be) are ei- 
ther ignorant or something worse. 

" I dont know how it came about, that in a letter not long ago 
to the Bishop of Rochester, I gave my opinion against the me- 
thod of transmitting your letters by masters of ships, and preferrd 
the having one appointed for that business, wherof it seems he 
gave you information. As that business is now out of my hands, 
I dont know what may be the opinion of the person now em- 
ployd therin, but I have the experience of such dangers as well 
as uncertaintys attending the old tract, that with great submis- 
sion to your judgement, were it my own case I woud prefer the 
other way. Thers no humane device infallible nor no measures 
absolutely certain, but I think I coud contrive a method less ly- 
able to hazards, than what has been hitherto followed. The al- 
most daylie intercourse of ships from some one port or another 
in Scotland and, wher these fail or may be suspected, in North- 
umberland, the Bishoprick of Durham or Yorkshire to and from 
Holland, renders it very easie, and by changing of ports, very safe 
for one to pass and repass often and at all times ; and if some 
person was appointed to make the voyage every 2 months or 
therby, to receive and deliver letters to and from your corri- 
spondents in Holland and Scotland, you, knowing the time he 
was to be in Holland, coud easily have them readie to be givn 
him. The great nay only difficultie in my opinion is to pitch on 
a right person, who has the fidelity and address necessary in such 
a work and whose rambling about woud not give suspicion, and 
I will freelie own I know of none but Thomas S'clare: he is I do 
belive the cliverest fellow in Europe for such expeditions; he 
knows all the ports in most countries; he has wayes peculiar to 
himself (of which he gave good proofs at Perth 1715) in going 
about such errands; he's zealouslie honest and as closs as a stone, 
and withall has been rambling about all his life, often merchan- 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 391 

dizing and pursuing projects which led him in a manner to have 
no fixed residence, and by dealing in some small parcells of goods, 
he might easily find a fair pretence for jogging on in that course 
of life. I mentiond this to him before he returnd to Scotland, 
when he came over with me, and he was willing to undertake it 
for 50/. a year, which he reckoned enuff to defray his expences 
and make up his loss of time, proposing no gain in any matter 
wherin he coud serve you: but after all ther was no need of 
describing him so minutely, since he's now out of the way, ha- 
ving, as Ime told, gone lately to Spain in prosecution of a large 
sum of mony to which he has right by the death of his brother 
in law Captain Wachup, and which probably may detain him 
long in that countrie. Thus in obedience to your commands I 
have laid my thoughts on this article before you, how far they 
are reasonable is to you humblie submitted. 

" I shall soon now have ane occasion from hence to let your 
journey be known to your freinds in Scotland, tho without that 
it will be no longer a secret than commenced. 

" I highly applaud your generous intentions in favors of the 
deserving son of the deserving father Collonell Clephane : It will 
enable him to qualifye him self for serving you some time or other, 
which is the top of his ambition, and it will be a great encou- 
ragement to others of his fathers trade, when they know the care 
you take of his family : Tho in this, two points I presume to sug- 
gest to you, that he must be ascertaind of what you design for 
him, otherwayes Ime affraid his circumstances wont allow him 
to continue in his present state, and nixt that it must be keept 
very secret, for shoud it come to be but suspected it woud undo 
him. 

" I delivered your message to General Hamilton who received 
it with a dutifull respect. 

" By my letters from Scotland I find matters are there in statu 
quo, tho great pains are takn to give the people a good impres- 



392 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

sion of the gentleman newlie slept into the throne. The Episco- 
pall clergy are broke and split into partys and discord, one set, 
headed by Lord Panmure and Mr. Carnagy, seem to have re- 
nounced all dependance on both civill and ecclesiastick superiors, 
so that to all outward appearance theyr in a bad situation, espe- 
cially since therby the unity, which has hitherto prevaild amongst 
both clergy and laity of that communion, your freinds, is broke 
and evanishd. 

" On what I wrot to my son in relation to what I mentiond in 
mine of October 7th, and you again in your answer therto, he 
has been at a good deall of pains to enquire furder into that storie, 
and tho he cannot pretend to say whither the particulars said to 
be discovered from the seized letters their not agreeing with the 
originalls, doth proceed from design or mistake, yet lies very pos- 
sitive that the Goverment is posesst of such papers as I repre- 
sented to you and that they purchassd them with mony, and he 
adds that the person from whom the information came did it with 
a good intention and that the Goverment are so far from divul- 
ging it with ane intention to creat a jealousie amongst your 
freinds, that they keep it as a mighty secret, and no soul living 
hears the least surmise therof, further than I acquainted you. 
Tis my duty to lay this before you, altho you seem to be very posi- 
tive that theirs nothing in it, and I wish it may be so. 

" The cypher is come safe to my son, who will deliver it to 
Dundonald when he comes to Edinburgh in a litle time, so pro- 
bably youl hear soon from him. Mr. Dundas told me tother day 
lie had a letter from Sir John Graeme, and tho I guessd it con- 
taind some directions about corrispondence, since he keept him- 
self closs to me (which I was glad to find) I took no notice as if 
1 knew any thing of the matter. 

" Lord Kincardine writes to me that their seems to be ane uni- 
versall jealousie and dislike at certain persons who for some time 
past have been cheifly trusted by you about your person, on what 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 393 

grounds he cant pretend further to say, than that universall cre- 
dite is given to the many facts theyr charged with, that occasiond 
the Queens retiring and the removall of sevrall persons of rank 
and charactar that had long and faithfully served you and your 
cause at the expence of their all : These matters, lie sayes, so con- 
fidently and particularly reported, your enimys lay hold on, to 
the great mortification of your freinds, and he wishes your affairs 
were under such management as ther may be no grounds for 
such surmises after this. For my own share I have no attach- 
ment to any but yourself, nor no particular picque against any, 
but I coud not satisfye my mind if I faild to acquaint you of what 
so faithfull a freind so earnestly recommended, and what ever use 
you make of this and the like informations, I hope youl keep them 
to yourself, as I have no mind to incurr the ill will of any person, 
by being reckond of any party whatsoever but your own. 

" By a letter I had lately from London Ime assured that tho 
no body doubts but that nixt session of Parliament will produce 
a general act of pardon, yet my good old personall freind the 
Duke of Argyle has of himself renewd his application for me and 
has good hopes of procuring a noliprosequi very soon : If either 
of these happen, I presume youl not take amiss my reaping the 
benifite, since I can do you no service on this side of the sea at 
present, and that my family affairs require my presence at home, 
if I can do it with safety. In this state of uncertainty it may so 
fall out that I may be gone from hence, before I can have a re- 
turn to this, and therfore it will not be expedient that you write 
again to me till you hear further from me, for I will be sure to 
acquaint you of my motions. If I get home you may be sure I 
must live with the utmost caution, because if any thing is disco- 
vered against me and I fall into the Goverments hands, I will 
meet with no quarters ; on which account I must be deprived of 
the honor of corrisponding directly with yourself. Nevertheless, 
the examples of my predecessors and my own well rooted prin- 

VOL. II. 3 E 



394 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

ciples will never allow me to be any thing but a faithfull servant 
to you and your royall family, and I hope in so far as has hitherto 
past, I have your approbation in every state and circumstance of 
my life and particularly in the discharge of that trust you com- 
mitted to me: that being now in the hands of another, who 
Ime sure will answer your expectations and the valuable cha- 
ractar he has with all good men, I pray God matters may be car- 
ried on with secresie and success, and however privately and 
unactively I must pretend to live for some time at least, no 
consideration shall ever byass me to neglect any opportunity of 
convincing you and demonstrating to the world, that I value 
no charactar so much nor any honor so high as those of being 
Yours." 

Letter to the King. 

" 29 January 1728. 

" Sir, Since rny last of the 22 instant I have had ane occasion 
to see and talk with a good many masters of Scots ships that are 
now here, and I wish to God you had such a loadning to send 
home with them as they d with heart and soul take aboard : 
Amongst them thers one that is a very sensible prudent person, 
the son of a Sterlingshire gentleman who was in his duty 1715: 
he has a good ship and begun a business of running constantly 
backwards and forewards twixt this place and Leith, so as to be 
here every 2 months or therby. After advising with William 
Dundas, wee concluded that if he woud undertake the care of 
your letters, his frequent returns woud answer your purposes in 
the present juncture, and this woud be a safe enuff and much 
cheaper way than what I mentiond in my last ; for by knowing 
of one whos time was sure and might be depended on, the danger 
from being obliged to trust people not perfectly well known was 
avoided and a litle gratification woud be sufficient. Dundas 
therfore proposed it to him, and with all imaginable frankness 
he undertook it, protesting that ship and master were at your 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 395 

devotion, and that he woud have no salary for doing what di<I 
put him to no charges (except contriving a secret place in case 
of a search for letters, which woud cost but a triffle) and on 
the other hand was his duty and inclination. Two conditions 
he expressly required, viz. That no person, no not yourself, shoud 
know of his name as being employd in this affair, and that he 
shoud be charged with letters addressd only to one and the same 
person, to whom he coud have easie access. I desired him to be 
assured that the secret shoud be keept in the terms he demanded, 
unless you possitively required otherwayes, and that as to the 
other point, it was I belived regulate alreadie according to his 
mind ; after which wee agreed on the measure, if so be you ap- 
proved of it. It will therfore be expedient that as soon as you 
receive this, you signifye to Dundas that such a project was com- 
municate to you, and transmitt your opinion and orders to him 
upon it, that he may know whither or not to follow it out. Since 
this man will not accept of a fixed pension, I submit to you how 
far it woud be a satisfaction and encouragement to him, if you 
directed Dundas to tell him how well you took his readiness to 
serve you, and withall to make him a small present, in your 
name, of a sword, a ring, or some such tiling, to the value of ten 
guineas. This at once woud be a reward to him for all the dayes 
of his life, and engage him to serve you on perhaps more ma- 
teriall occasions. Hes to sail soon and will be back again by 
the time you can signifye your pleasure to Dundas. I do verily 
belive tins will be a safe and certain way of carrying your di- 
spatches to and fro, which is however humblie submitted to you. 
I am with the most profound respect Yours." 

Tho the new King George coud not be perswaded by the ad- 
vice of his ministers to grant a general indemnity (which great 
numbers, after the bad usage they had received, woud have em- 
braced and givn all assurances of living quietly at home) yet as 

3E2 



396 REGISTER OP LETTERS. 

it was but decent to show some disposition towards mercy at the 
beginning of his reign, he was so far prevaild upon as graciouslie 
to pardon a parcell of litle underline malefactors under sentence 
in the prisons in and about London ; and as I was under no sen- 
tence, my case was more favorable than most of those who were 
reckond State criminalls, and being as such warmly represented by 
the Duke of Argile, Earl of Hay, and Duncan Forbes Lord Advocat 
for Scotland, all 3 my good personall freinds,ane allowance was att 
length procured for my returning and living at home unmolested; 
this I was expecting for some preceeding months, but it was the 
midle of Aprile 1728 before I received letters from Lord Hay and 
Mr. Forbes acquainting me therof. It was my intention to have 
crossd directly to Scotland, but by these letters my presence at 
London, and that presently, was possitivly required. As I knew 
very well that these my freinds were men of too much honor to 
draw me into any straits, I was nevertheless at a stand how to 
behave ; I knew that ther was proof enuff said to be against me, 
and as I was not posessd of a remission, I did not care for ven- 
turing myself into the hands of a Ministry, for shoud they ask 
questions at me and I refuse to answer, I had no security for my 
being at libertie to return back ; under this difficultie I writ to 
my freinds, that tho I was infinitely obliged to them and ex- 
pected nothing from them but what was fair and honorable, I 
did not however think it prudent to venture over, untill I had 
more possitive and particular assurances under the hands of some 
of the Goverment, that I was to be askd no questions, nor no 
further security demanded of me than my bare word of living 
quietly at home, otherwise I woud remain abroad all the dayes of 
my life. In answer to which I received a letter from Mr Forbes, by 
the direction of Sir Robert Walpole, in ample terms to my satis- 
faction, but still insisting upon my taking London in my way. 
Judging my self pritty safe under that security, after having 



REGISTER OF LETTEUS. 397 

writ a teller acquainting the King of the libertie allowd me and 
the terms on which I had accepted it, I left Rotterdam in the 
beginning of May and arrived safe at London. 

My freinds told me that King George was positive in my re- 
turning him personally thanks for that great instance which he 
thought he had shown of a gracious disposition towards me, and 
in truth it was the more remarkable in that he coud not be pre- 
vaild on to extend it to others, particularly my Lady Southesk, 
whose case was more favorable than mine ; and so to gratifye 
him by my appearing in his Court, I was obliged to come to 
London. This was what did not go well down with me and 
what I woud gladly have avoided, but ther was no eviting it ; 
and as others, whose sincere attachment to the King was never 
doubted, had often preceeded me on such like occasions, I was 
nnder a necessity of bowing my knee to Baal now that I was in 
the house of Rim. But before a day was appointed 1 5 dayes 
past, during which I was orderd not to appear publicly, and as 
I did not like nor well understand so long a confinement and de- 
lay, I acquainted Sir Robert Walpole, that since what I was 
made belive woud be my treatment, was not like to happen, I 
hoped I might have libertie to return from whence I came ; wher- 
upon he sent for me nixt day and introduced me to King George 
in his closet. After a litle speech of thanks, he told me, witli 
some heat in his looks, that I had been long in a bad way and 
he d judge how far I deserved the favor he had now shown me, 
by my future conduct. I made a bow and went off, well de- 
termined never to trust in his mercy, which did not seem to 
abound. 

Being now at full libertie to appear in public, I received great 
civilitys from my old acquaintances the heads of the Torys, who 
were extremely inquisitive to know from me the true state of the 
Kings affairs and conduct abroad : but as I found they knew too 
much alreadie and that I coud not say what woud give them a 



S98 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

better opinion of them, I keept as much on generalls as possible. 
Those of the Goverment, and particularly Sir Robert Walpole, 
received me with the greatest civility, and severall insinuations 
were made, that if I woud enter into the service and measures 
of the Goverment, that I shoud be made very welcome. But I told 
them I was heartily wearied of daubling in politicks, and wanted 
only to retire and live privately at home. 

In my frequent conversations with my 2 freinds Lord Hay and 
Mr. Forbes, jointly and seperately, I learnt how that Strahan, on 
his first and 2d examinations at London, stood his ground man- 
fully, and beliving he d be soon discharged, writ by the com- 
mon post a letter to Corsar at Edinburgh, in which he was so 
imprudent as to drop severall expressions which signifyed his 
having keept his secret and discovered nothing of what he knew. 
This was intercepted, and he being therwith confronted was 
so confounded that he lost both his courage and prudence, by 
confessing that he had been long employed in conveying letters 
to and from the King, that the packet seized at Leith might be 
from him, but he knew nothing particularly, Corsar and I know- 
ing more of such matters than he did: but he possitively refused 
to give any particular informations, telling them he was ane old 
man and they might hang him if they pleased, for he woud not 
save his life by being either ane evidence or informer. This step 
of his however occasiond the warrand for taking up Corsar and 
me, and when he (Corsar) came to London he behaved very 
resolutely at first, but in some time was drawn in by degrees 
to own so much that they forced him to tell all he knew, from the 
time he was employd by Captain Straton, till then, in AvMch he 
laid open the canalls of the Kings corrispondence and with w r hom. 
The Goverment having thus and by other means discovered a 
great deall too much, it was moved and prest in the Cabinet 
Councill to prosecute the Earls of Wigtoun, Kincardine and 
Dondonald, the Lord Balmerinoch and my self for high treason, 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 399 

but the late King George opposed it; he said that the prelimina- 
rys being signd, there was a prospect of peace and he d have no 
more blood or forefaulters, especially seing the person most con- 
cernd (meaning me) had escaped, and in this lie was so possi- 
tive that his ministers after severall attempts were forced to drop 
it; yet they painted me out as a very obnoxious person, and pro- 
posed that at least they shoud proceed so far against me, as to 
prevent my returning home after the trienniall prescription, 
which had probably been followd out, if a certain freind of 
mine, then present, had not represented, that it was scarce worth 
the pains to take so much notice of a private gentleman, espe- 
cially seing what was proposed coud not be attaind, without 
prepaling all the story, which he imagined His Majestie did not 
incline to, since he was against prosecuting the rest, and so I 
escaped what was designd against me, and Corsar and Strahan 
were admitted to bail. 

On being told these and such like passages, I answered that 1 
did not know how far they might have evidence against me and 
the other persons, but I was sure neither Corsar nor Strahan coud 
say that these letters seized were from the King, and supposing 
they had said so, I had not received them and so was guilty of 
no crime: To this my freinds replyd ther was plenty of evidence 
of all kinds against us and cheifly me, for besides Corsars infor- 
mations, they knew every thing that was done at the Pretenders 
Court and were masters of what papers they pleased: "Nay," 
said one of them, " your freinds, Lockhart, did not give you fair 
play, for they writ to you by a cypher of which they knew wee 
had a coppy." 1 replyd that I did not belive one word of it, for 
it was ane ussuall trick in statesmen to pretend they had intelli- 
gence of the most secret doings, with a design of raising jealou- 
sies and fears amongst there enimys: Wherupon one of my 
freinds returnd, that he was determined to convince me, and 
then produced a paper, which containd the cant names of the 



400 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

aforesaid persons and sevrall others in my cypher, telling me 
distinctly who was meant by them, adding with ane oath that he 
read the seized letters, with no other impediment than turning 
over the leaves of his cypher; after which he told me what was 
containd in the letter intercepted for me, which I found agreed 
exactly with my letter of the 2d October, to which it was a re- 
turn; nay he repeated to me a good deall of the heads containd in 
that letter. These I confess surprized me much, and having said 
that I coud not imagine how they had come by these papers, it 
was answered, " What is proof against the inony of Great Bri- 
tain?" On my ruminating afterwards on these particulars, I 
coud not but give credit to this confirmation of the accounts I 
formerlie had of the Kings secrets being discovered, for tho I 
knew that their were who pretend to the art of uncyphering any 
the most intricate cypher that can be devised, yet I question if 
the Divell himself can know what person is realie meant by a fic- 
titious name, if so be the corrispondents keep their own secrets, 
and therfore I coud not but think their was treachery at the bot- 
tom by some about the Kings person, unless the cypher used by 
the King and me had by him been lodged and used in a corri- 
spondence with some other persons and thorow their fault or some 
unlucky accident falln into the Goverments hands; but then, tho 
this might have been the case as to the cypher, it does not like- 
wise account for the knowledge of what was containd in my let- 
ter, seing no imaginable way can be assigned for its falling into 
their hands, as the other. One thing I am sure of, that never 
mortal! saw the coppy lodged with me; and if the King used it in 
his corrispondence with others, twas highly impoliticly on various 
accounts, particularly as it exposed it to discoverys and was no 
longer a cheque on my fidelity. Whom to accuse as the author 
of this criminall intelligence is more than I can take upon me, 
further than that in all probability it must proceed from onenCar 
the Kings person, who had access to his papers; but as I will 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 401 

conceall nothing that can give light or pave the way for disco- 
vering this villany some time or other, I cant ommitt mentioning 
that a person of note and distinction (not any of those I formerlie 
spoke of but whose name line under promise to conceall) did at 
London assure me that Lord Inverness was in the Goverments 
pay, and that by and thorow him they were masters of what pa- 
pers they pleased, and knew all the Kings secrets ; that the packet 
which was seized was dispatchd and information therof sent in 
order to its being seized, for that Lord being apprehensive that 
the vigorous opposition and warm representations of the Kings 
trustees in Scotland against him and in favor of the Queen 
woud at last prevail with His Majestie, thought nothing woud 
so effectually prevent his fall, as cutting off those who were most 
active against him, with which veiw he writ, and discovered to 
the Goverment, the letters in that packet. If this fact is true, no 
age ever produced a more monstrous instance of malicious, vil- 
lanous treacherie and revenge; and tho I am far from asserting 
it as a truth to be depended on, (tho my author was a person of 
good credite and knew a great deal of the Court intrigues,) yet 
some particulars, which my reflections on this passage recalld to 
my mind, raised in me a strong suspicion of this Lord. I had 
formerlie sent over with Allan Cameron to the King a new cy- 
pher to be used in our future corrispondence; this I did because 
I was then of opinion that Lord coud not stand long out, nay I 
did not know but he was dismissd ere it coud reach the King; 
and as it might happen that His Lordship had taken coppys of 
the Kings cyphers, and it was uncertain how far revenge might 
lead him to deliver them up to His Majesties enimys, I judged 
it expedient to lay aside the old and use a new method in cor- 
responding, and this new cypher was accordingly used by the 
King and my self after he received it, except in this letter which 
was seized; and what account can be given why it was then 
laid aside and the old one re-assumed, is more than I can ima- 

VOL. II. 3 p 



402 REGISTER OF LETTERS. 

gine. If the aforsaid charge is true, then it naturally occurrs 
that this was done because the Goverment were masters of it 
and not of the new one. It is likewayes remarkable that the 
packet seized was the very first that was writ after Mr. Andrews 
(Invernesses creature) was laid aside, on what I writ concerning 
him in mine of the 1 September and 20 October, and Mr. Dun- 
das again imployd in conveying the Kings dispatches from Hol- 
land. Ane objection in favors of Inverness here obviously oc- 
currs : since Dundas was not on his side of the question, it is 
not to be supposed that the Goverment was by the means of that 
Lord acquainted of the ship in which the packet was sent, so as 
she shoud be watchd and boarded by the custom house yaught 
at the mouth of the Firth, in virtue of the orders from Court to 
search her narrowlie for letters. To this it may be answered, 
that on supposing this Lord acted in consequence of the crimi- 
nall corrispondence he's charged with or out of revenge at Dun- 
clascs being re-imployd, wee may readily imagine he woud ac- 
quaint his freind Andrews of a packets being then sent to Dundas, 
and as al that time no other ship was bound for Leith from Rot- 
terdam, he might fall on many wayes, by generall and unsus- 
pected questions and observing Dundas and Trail (the master of 
the ship) in company togather, to suspect the letters were to be 
sent by this ship and therupon obey his patrons directions in ac- 
quainting the Goverment therof: And indeed whilst I was after- 
wards at Rotterdam I found Andrews very capable of executing 
such a part, for he was reckoned a very false cunning fellow, ha- 
ving had his education from Captain Abercromby of Glassoch, 
a never failing servant to the Ministry; nay it consisted with 
my certain knowledge that he corrisponded with my Lord Hay 
and at the same time with Lord Inverness: This I discovered a 
few dayes before I left Rotterdam, by a very casuall accident, 
and it seems pritty materiall towards confirming the jealousie of 
Lord Inverness integrity. 

.n .JOY 



REGISTER OF LETTERS. 403 

After I staid a few weeks at London, I set out for Scotland, and 
lived at my countrie house in the most retired private manner, 
having no corrispondence with the King nor dealings with James 
Hamilton and Robert Freebairn 2 litle underline tools to Inver- 
ness, to whose management all the Kings affairs at London and 
Edinburgh were now committed, whilst at the same time no 
person of charactar and prudence woud have any communica- 
tion with them. 

The cheif design of this work being to collect, and perhaps 
transmit to posterity, coppys of these Letters to and from the 
King and his trustees in Scotland, I found it necessary to sub- 
join a short account of sevrall passages which served to illustrate 
the same and carry on the history of these times; and as it com- 
mences from the time I was employd in carrying on this corri- 
spondence, I do not pretend to continue it after another was ap- 
pointed in my place upon my being obliged to leave the king- 
dom : and indeed sevrall other circumstances concurr in fixing 
upon this as a proper time to finish this work. For after signing 
of the prseliminarys and King Georges death, all the Kings then 
schemes and projects were at ane end, as the affairs and veiws of 
almost all the princes of Europe took a quite different turn and 
their designs in favor of the King were superceded and must so 
remain whilst the ruling powrs continue in this pacific dispo- 
sition. 

And here if wee look into the state of the Kings affairs, they 
appear with a more dismall aspect than I ever knew them, as he 
has no prospect of (at least sudden) assistance from abroad. 
King George the 2d mounted the British throne with the favor 
of the populace, whither more from that nationall genius which 
is constantly pleased with noveltys or out of odium to his father, 
with whom he was in bad terms and whom they heartily hated, 
I shant say, but so it is that at first all parties made court to him; 
and before they began to cool (by discovering the few popular 

3F2 



404 REGISTER OF LEf TERS. 

acts he performed were all grimace, as he followd his predeces- 
sors measures) he establishd himself by procuring such a Par- 
liament to be elected as consisted of as well disciplined members 
as those of his powerfull army, both which being made up of 
men pickt out and of known zeall to the revolution interest and 
trtiely mercenary, as they were well paid, went thorow stitches 
to serve him and establish his dominion on the united basis of a 
military power and legall authority, whilst at the same time ; the 
King, line affraid, daylie loses ground. He began the world 
with the generall esteem of mankind ; evry person, freind and 
foe, allowd him to be a wise, sober, just, good natured prince, 
of great knowlcge and application in business ; and such as knew 
him, both forreigners and subjects, concurrd in portending the 
happiness of that people over whom he shoud rule, and this cha- 
ractar he mantaind whilst the Duke of Mar was at the head of 
his affairs after his return from Scotland. Tis true he Was thought 
to put too much trust and shew too much favor towards His Grace, 
so as all matters were directed solely by him, wherby the Duke 
of Ormond and sevrall other persons of quality thought them- 
selves slighted, and retired from the -Court; ydt still affairs were 
managed with a good decorum and dexterity, and severall well 
laid projects carryd on and prudent negotiations set a foot, and 
people excused the Kings having a byass towards a person that 
had made so great ane effort for him and who was certainly a 
very able minister, tho not free of that ambition Which overules 
'the minds of most statesmen, by endeavouring to monopolize all 
power into their own hands. But soon after Mars removall, His 
Majesties character and affairs appeard in a quite different light : 
'great blunders were committed in the execution of 'affairs in 
Scotland (and the same was alledgedahti may ; be reasonably sup- 
posed elsewhere)so that people soon saw'ihat they were not carryd 
tin 'With the' dexterity and secresie as 'formerlife ; 'but that which 
struck; the nail to the 'head was his allowing these his favorites 



REGISTER OP LETTERS. 405 

(which seems to be a curse in a peculiar manner entaild on the 
royal race of Stewart) to rule under him in so absolute arbitrary a 
manner, that for their sake and on their account, the prerogatives 
of a soveraign and a husband are skrewed up to a pitch not te- 
nable by the laws of God or man, or consistent with prudence ; 
in so far as the royall consort, the mother of the royall issue, 
and subjects of the best quality and merit who had served the 
King with their blood and fortunes, are trampled upon and 
abused by a parcell of people who never were nor will be ca- 
pable to do the King any materiall service and are contemptible 
in the sight of all that know them, and at last forced to seek a 
sanctuary in some other place arid on that account deprived of 
the small pensions they received for supporting themselves, after 
having lost all for the King. And as all these continued steps of 
unaccountable proceedings were contrary to the repeated prayers 
and remonstrances of His Majesties best freinds, princes and 
subjects, they gave the world a very unfavorable opinion of his 
prudence, justice, honour and gratitude, and highlie discouraged 
such as were inclined and capable to advise and serve him, and 
created ane universall despair of ever seeing a probality of better 
dayes. 

And thus whilst no party is acting for his interest, no projects 
formed, nothing done to keep up the spirits of the people, the 
old race drops off by degrees and a new one sprouts up, who 
having no particular byass to the King, as knowing litle more 
of him than what the public news papers bear, enter on the 
stage with a perfect indifference, at least coolness, towards him 
and his cause, which consequently must daylie languish and in 
process of time be tottally forgot. In which melancholy situa- 
tion of the Kings affairs, I leave them in the year 1728. 



LETTERS, 



&c. 









LETTERS, 



&c. 



Tlie five following articles bear no dates, and it is probable that 
the last three Letters were not intended for the press ; but they 
contain so many proofs of a well regulated mind and affec- 
tionate disposition, such excellent principles and such admira- 
ble sense, that it would be unjust to the writer to withhold 
them from the world. EDITOR. 



SONG 

to the tune of " Old long syne." 

1. 

O CALIDON, O Calidon, how wretched is thy fate, 

I, thy St. Andrew, do lament your poor unhappy state, 

O Calidon, O Calidon, how greivd am I to think 

That your sad story writen is with blood instead of ink. 

2. 

In days of yore you was renownd, conspicous was your fame, 
All nations did your valour praise, and loyalty proclaim, 
Your antient rights you did mantain, and libertys defend, 
And scorn'd to have it thought that you on England did depend. 

VOL. II. 3 G 



410 so??G. 

3. 

Unto your Kings you did adhere, stood by the royall race, 
With them you honour great did gain, and paths of glory trace, 
With royall STUART at your head all enemys oppose, 
And like our brave heroic Clans, in peices cut your foes. 

4.' 

Your Kings did justice then dispence and led you on to fight, 
And your stupendous courage was like ther example bright, 
A happy people then you was, with plenty did abound, 
And your untainted loyaltie with blessings great was crownd. 



- 

But oh ! alas ! the case is changd, you'r wretched and forlorn, 
The hardships now impos'd on you, by slaves are only born, 
Ypur antient rights which you so long did with your blood 

man tain, 
Are meanlie sold and givn up, and you dare scarce complain. 

6. 

Justice now has left the land, with taxes you'r opprest, 
And evry litle pratling wretch may freelie you molest, 
The choisest of your noble blood are banishd far away, 
And such as do remain at home must truckle and obey. 

7. 
Your martial spirit's quite decayd, you'r poor contented slaves, 

You'r kickd and cuffd oppressd harrassd by scoundrels fools and 

ir J KtijiUiTT) 

knaves, 

Against your King you did rebell, abjurd the royall race, 
For which just Heaven did punish you with woe contempt 
disgrace. 

8. 

This Prince alone the crown shoud wear and royall scepter sway, 
To him alone you shoud submit and your aledgiance pay, 



LETTER. 411 

A Prince endowd with virtues rare, so pious and so great, 
That were it not to punish you, he'd have a better fate. 

*' lir 

/ 

O Calidon, O Calidon, look back from whence ye fell, 
And from your sufferings learn your crime, and nere again rebell, 
Redeem your antient liberties, regain your rights and laws, 
Restore your injurd lawfull Prince, or perish in the cause. 

10. 

Your reputation thus you may, thus only can retreive, 
And till you justice do to him, you need not think to thrive, 
O may th' Almighty King of Kings his sovraign powr extend, 
And his annointeds precious life from perrills all defend. 

11. 

O may just Heaven assert his right, him to his own restore, 

And may the Scotish nation shine, illustrious as before, 

O Calidon, O Calidon, how joyfull woud I be, 

To see the King upon his throne, and you from chains set free. 



LETTER 

to Mr. Salmon author of the Reveiw of the History of England. 

Edenburgh. 

SIR, I lately perused your Reveiw of the History of England, 
and am extremely well pleased with the performance. The veiws 
that you give of the sevrall reigns and charactars are just and 
impartiall. The facts you adduce to illustrate the nature of the 
English constitution are plain and uncontestable, the inferences 
you draw are proper and undenyable and the reflections you offer 



413 LETTER. 

are judicious and instructive. From the scope and spirit of the 
work, tis no difficult matter to guess at your principles and opinion 
with respect to Goverment and the right and title of the present 
governing powers, tho you have so prudentlie and cautiouslie 
expressd your sentiments, that however grating the work may be 
to some, you'r pritty safe, I conceive, against legall prosecutions 
on that head ; but against ane act of Parliament to unridle the 
most secret thoughts of your heart and lay open what you de- 
signd to conceall, nay perhaps did not enter into your mind, no 
private man of this generation will adventure, I presume, to en- 
sure you ; yet if this shoud even happen, you have more merile 
towards gaining of favour (for law and justice have nothing to 
do in such cases) than I verily belive you intended or perhaps 
are apprized of, by your large concessions, towards removing the 
hedge of security, planted in the first ages and thence till of late 
carefully cultivated and upheld, about the sacred persons of 
crownd heads. 

I will not enter in the question how far one soveraign prince 
can lawfully, on any account, put to death any other soveraign 
prince that is altogather independent. A great deall may be 
said for the negative, and it cannot be asserted but wher the 
sovereigns life and the safety of his people cannot otherwise be 
preserved; for if on every attempt against a prince and his domi- 
nions, the invader that shall happen to fall into his hands, may 
be put to death, wars woud become very cruell and barbarous. 
Few princes I belive that prove victorious woud not push for- 
ward ther success to the subduing of his adversary with his do- 
minions, and if so, such a prince, especially if he was the ag- 
gressor, by a change of fortune, falling into his enemys hands, 
might be put to death ; nay in all wars twixt princes, however 
justly commenced by the captivated prince, he woud be subject 
to the will of one that is both judge and partie, and ane ambitious 
illdesigning prince woud never want excuses or feign pretences 



LETTER. 

to cut of the other. But so far hath this doctrine been dissa- 
proved of, that I cant call to mind in profane history, of any ju- 
diciall tryall commenced and carried on by one soveraign prince 
against another, till your Queen Elizabeths reign, on any pre- 
text whatsoever ; for wher reasons of state renderd it expedient 
to cut of a captivated prince, the same was done in a private ar- 
bitrary manner, which, nay the obliging such ane unfortunate 
prince to yeild and grant high and unreasonable terms, hath 
been in all ages and by all authors condemnd as unjust and un- 
generous, and consequentlie serves to show that the action is il- 
legall and unjustifiable. But I will not insist on such generall 
propositions, it being plain from the strain and spirit of your 
book, that you entertain a just and high regard for the person 
as well as the office of a soveraigne, which indeed are so blended 
togather as to be inseperable. But as you are pleased to assign 
some reasons (page 259) towards justifying your Queen Eliza- 
beths conduct, in putting our Queen Mary to death, I will, with 
all submission, examine the same and do my best to convince 
you they will not stand the test, by any rule of law equity honour 
or conscience. 

I own, that the greatest provocation can be givn a prince 
to carry matters to the highest resentment against another, is 
when it appears he has formed treacherous infamous designs 
against his life, but in the present case, it is pritty ev ident Queen 
Mary had no such veiws ; what hapned to her was not the first, 
and is not the latest instance, of a conspiracy hatchd and con- 
trived, with a veiw to entangle and ruin persons wholly innocent, 
that hapned to stand in the way of a Minislrys base selfish de- 
signs, and you seem to acquit our Queen of any such bloody in- 
famous design, in so far as you own it is possible she might not 
be concernd in the conspiracy against your Queens life, But 
then you proceed to justifye her death by affirming (as indeed 
she did not deny) that she was engaged in such measures, that 



414- LETTER. 

if they had succeeded must have ended in the destruction of Queen 
Elizabeth, and why when the Queen of Scots had armed for- 
reign powers against the Queen of England and invited her own 
subjects to depose her, she might not as ivell be deemd one enimy 
as if she liad invaded the kingdom, yoiCr at a loss to discover, and 
in that case you say none coud have calld it injustice : To take off 
one enimy in her just defence reflects no dishonour upon the Queen 
and her Ministry. Now, sir, I humblie differ from you, that 
every enimy and much more every prince invading a kingdom 
may be deprived of life. This, as I observed before, is contrary 
to the maxims and practice of all ages and nations, as it woud 
prove highlie detrimentall to mankind, by opening a door to in- 
troduce bloody revengefull retalliations, perpetuate feuds and 
nationall quarrells and exclude quarters and mercy amongst dis- 
cording nations, seing wars and rumours of wars will be existing 
till the world is more universally reformed, and thence it is that 
all nations agree, in a more Christian manner of carrying on 
wars, than you lay doun, and consequently your generall propo- 
sition will not hold, seing the universall law and practice of na- 
tions must be the rule in such cases. But to come nearer to you, 
by granting what you positively, tho indeed, I conceive, errone- 
ouslie affirm, you will also, I suppose, yeild to me, that the first 
rise and occasion of the invasion and war that followed upon it, 
must be duely considered, in order to justifye such severe punish- 
ments. If the prince whos takn by his enimy was not the first 
aggressor, but made the invasion to retalliate the like done to 
him, or as the most probable way to disconcert the enterprises of 
his enimy against him, I hope youl allow his case is ane exception 
from your generall rule. Which being granted as highlie agree- 
able to justice and equity, let us nixt take a reveiw of the affair 
in question and from thence form a judgement of the contraversie 
betwixt us. 

Mary Queen of Scotland was a soveraign princess (for I per- 



LETTER. 415 

ceive you have little regard for your de facto kings in England, 
and the constitution of Scotland was the same) independent (if 
after any pretended right of superiority was yeild up by the King 
and people of England, prescrived and become obsolete, any scru- 
ple remains with you, be pleased to peruse the learned Craig on 
the Soveraignity of Scotland and the judicious Andersons Inde- 
pendency of the Scots Crown) of all other powers under God. 
Whilst she was cloathd with a husband (the French King) and 
under his authority in a countrie, forreigne to her as Queen of 
Scotland, her right and title to the crown of England, was as- 
serted by her said husband, nay he and she assumed, in virtue of 
her right, the title and carried the arms of England (God have 
mercy on the Kings of England if they fall into the French Kings 
hands) but after her husbands death, returning to her own here- 
ditary dominions, she dropd her pretentions, in so far as she laid 
aside the title and arms and by letters embassys &c. ownd Queen 
Elizabeths title. For some time she reigned happily and peace- 
ably over her own naturall born subjects, but being at length 
oppressd, run down and dethroned by a parcell of hypocriticall 
rebel ious subjects, eggd on and supported by Queen Elizabeth, 
she's drivn out of her native countrie and compelld to fly for 
shelter into that of another prince. Instead of being treated with 
the hospitality due to a stranger in distress ; instead of being re- 
ceived with the love and kindness of a near kinswoman and a 
dear ally ; instead of having the assistance, which one woud think 
was the interest of all crownd heads to give on such occasions, 
she is seized as a traitor or criminall and keept many, many long 
years under confinement: during which she frequentlie made 
the most moving applications, even such as it is amazing did not 
affect a princess, endowed with so many shining virtues, as are 
set furth in the charactar of your Queen Elizabeth. But finding 
all was in vain, that her subjects were encouraged and assisted 
to continue undutifull to her, nay to blast and blacken her repu- 



416 LETTER. 

tation and cliaractar, by horrid aspersions and villanous forgerys, 
and that ther was no prospect of releif from what she coud urge 
to Queen Elizabeth by the tyes of blood, the common interest of 
princes and the known rules of equity and justice; being nearlie 
related to most of the princes of Europe, to them she applys and 
with them she consults, how thro ther assistance to obtain by 
force, what could not be accomplished otherwayes. On which 
account she was tryed sentenced and executed. 

Now, good sir, be pleased to consider, if the case is fairly 
stated and who appears to be the first aggressor. If according 
to your way of reasoning, it was lawfull in your Queen to deprive 
our Queen of her life, sure it was as lawfull for our Queen to 
oppose and make head against your Queen, being equally inde- 
pendent of each other. For your Queen had actually executed 
measures pernicious to our Queen, by exciting her subjects 
against her, by supporting them in ther rebellion, and by restrain- 
ing her of the libertie of her person, and had even acquired that 
power by a method inconsistent with all the rules of honour, hu- 
manity and corrispondence amongst societys. And all this hap- 
ued before she is accused of having only plotted and contrived 
measures, which miglit, if executed, have proved pernicious to 
yow Queen: so that it cannot be clenyed but Queen Elizabeth 
began the fray by doing the first injury, and refusing redress, 
without any provocation or reason, but what arose from state 
veiws, which, tlio perhaps prudent, are not alwayes just, and 
consequentlie, as you observe in other cases, not to be defended. 
And therfore tho our Queen, according to your maxim, might 
justly have deprived your Queen of her life, had she been in her 
power, yet the case widely differs as to your Queen, in regard 
(as I think cannot be denyed) she was the first aggressor, and 
put the other under ane absolute necessity of falling into these 
measures or otherwise contentedly yeilding herself up to the ar- 
bitrary power and unjust persecution of another, to whom she 



LETTER. 417 

owed no subjection, and was in all respects equall, either as to 
the dignity or qualifications of her person. In all wars and va- 
riances twixt Princes or States the occasion and first rise of them 
shoud be duely considered, with regard to the manner of carrying 
them on and ending them, and as matters stood twixt these 2 
rivall princesses, Queen Elizabeth coud not in conscience or ho- 
nour push her revenge to the utmost extremity; nay had the ta- 
bles changed and she falln under Queen Marys power, after so 
many repeated injuries and provocations, tho by your maxim 
she might justly have cut her of, yet such I confess is my reve- 
rence for the regall office and person, that I shoud never have ap- 
proved and much less been at pains to justifye it, by maxims es- 
pecially, so detri men tall to mankind and contrary to the laws and 
practice of nations. That soveraign princes may be opposed 
nay killd in fair batle, by even a private person, or if made pri- 
soners be detaind till they agree to such terms and give such se- 
curity as will render the prince and state they assaulted safe, I 
do not contravert ; but I cannot bear the thoughts of ther being 
subjected to the judiciall tryalls and penall sentences of other for- 
reign powers, more than of ther own subjects, and Ime affraid if 
a door be opened and a precedent laid down, in one case, for 
divesting princes of the security of ther persons, arising from 
the sacred charactar of the office, the King killing doctrine (which 
you seem sufficiently to abhorr) will take too deep root and be 
too much encouraged; and it is observeable that not many years 
after this first instance of such a tragicall case existed, it served 
as a precedent in England, to the Kings being judged, condemned 
and put to death by a power and authority proceeding from the 
Majestic of the people. A princes power and jurisdiction is li- 
mited as to persons as well as bounds, and as all soveraigns are 
accountable only to God, they are independent of one another, 
and being of a rank and degree above the rest of mankind are 
to be used more tenderlie; but as, notwithstanding of all ther, 
VOL. ir. 3 H 



418 JLETTEH. 

irnmumtys and dignitys, they are the sons and subjects of the 
Supreme Governour of the world, they are lyable to a share of 
humane calamitys, and when it pleases God, in the wise dispensa- 
tions of his providence, to stir up another prince against them, 
whos likely to prevaill over them, they may resist by all lawfull 
prudent wayes, but leave the issue to God, who sooner or later 
will judge betwixt princes as well as people of ane inferior rank* 
And I can by no means think, that the laws of self defence can 
be so far extended, as to allow of practices so diametrically op- 
posite to the interest of mankind, as unhinging the safety and 
security of Crown heads, by bringing them upon a level with 
the most abject of the people, and therby lessning the reverence 
and regard due to ther persons and office. 

That no soveraign prince hath a right of superiority or juris- 
diction over another is a maxim laid down and asserted by all 
lawers, and from this principle it is that a publick minister is 
exempted from the jurisdiction of the place wher he resides, be- 
cause as he represents the person of a soveraign, over whom an- 
other soveraign hath no superiority or jurisdiction, it cannot be 
extended to his ambassador, wherof wee have a very remarkable 
instance and very apropos to the present subject in the case of 
Leslie Bishop of Ross: He was in the year 1571 accused and 
convicted of the same practices in favours of Queen Mary against 
Queen Elizabeth for which the former was condemnd, and was 
threatned with death, but he boldly asserted that he was the am- 
bassador of a soveraign princess and by that charactar without 
the reach of the English laws and judicatories. And the English 
civilians who gave ther opinions in that case, did affirm that tho 
a prince might refuse to admitt the ambassador of another or 
order him to depart his dominions, yet whilst he continued he 
ought to enjoy the priviledges of his charactar. To the objec- 
tion that Queen Mary was deposed the Bishop replyd that the 
abdication on which the deposition proceeded was not voluntary, 



LETTER. 419 

but forced from her whilst a captive in the hands of her rebel- 
lious subjects, that this was so notorious and so much dissa- 
proved that in the year 1568 he was received and acknowledged 
in quality of her ambassador tho the pretended abdication pre- 
ceeded that time. Thus wee find the independence of a soveraign 
princess did save her embassador, but in a short period of time 
coud not save herself, which serves to let us see how grosslie po- 
liticians will contradict precedents laid down by themselves, con- 
sistent to the laws and practice of nations, when it serves to an- 
swer ther present designs. 

You represent Queen Elizabeth as very unwilling to execute 
the sentence against Queen Mary and in so doing you follow the 
jog trot of the writers of these times, who, give me leave to say, 
seem in ther accounts of that Queen, to be as much on the par- 
tiall flattering lay, as any of the authors you so frequentlie charge, 
during other reigns. I readily acknowledge, she was a princess 
adornd with many charming virtues, but I cannot assent to her 
being perfect, as her countriemen represent her, and I wish 
you had informed, wither this reluctance proceeded from a ten- 
der compassion of our Queens hard fate, or from the wranglings 
of her conscience arising from a conviction of the iniquity of the 
sentence or from a just dread of the consequences attending so 
unprecedented a measure. The truth ont is, I am perswaded any 
<x>ncern she truely had or affected, proceeded from the last of 
these motives, and what confirms this opinion, is her avoiding to 
bring the unfortunate Queen to a publick scaffold and endea- 
vouring, after the manner of other Princes on the like bloody 
occasions, to have her taken off in a private clandestine manner, 
of which you have a pritty clear proof in Dr. M c kinzies 3d vo- 
lume of the Lives of Scots Authors, lately published, in that part 
of it wher he treats of Queen Mary ; to which I refer you, and 
after having examined the story he relates, judge impartially if 
your heroines charactar is so universally glorious arid perfect a* 
her countriemen are at pains to draw it. 



420 LETTER. 

Allow me likewise to tell you that I am not perfectlie well plea- 
sed with your justification of King Charles 2ds schemes, after his 
restoration : I am far from thinking that such persons as acted mo- 
derately under the usurpation and seemd rather to be carryed away 
by the violent torrent of iniquity which then prevaild, than by ane 
innate principle of aversion to the King and monarchy, or that 
even such who acted more violently and zealouslie, upon ther 
submission (proceeding from ane appearance of a sense and sor- 
row of ther crimes) I am far I say from thinking these were to 
be totally discountenanced and discouraged, by being altogather 
deprived of the royall favour and confidence, tho withali, some 
marks of a just remembrance of the parts they acted, was abso- 
lutely necessary : neither do I conceive that the Cavaliers had 
just grounds to demand and expect that they shoud monopolize 
all the Kings bountie and all places of profile and power, nor a 
compleat reimbursement of all they had lost or expended on ac- 
count of and during the civill war, for as the quanrell was not 
solely the Kings, but equally the peoples, in so far as the con- 
stitution was invaded and subverted, every member of the society 
were obliged in duty and interest to contribute in a matter that 
was national! and so essentially affected the vitalls of the com- 
monwealth. And therfore wher the estates of the Cavaliers were 
confiscated and fines exacted from them, when these I say were 
applyd to the then publick tho illegall service, or wher they vo- 
luntarily raised mony and applyd it to the Kings and ther coun- 
tries service, I conceive no reparation coud be made to them, but 
either by a nationall tax or the Crowns care to conferr on them 
as many and as great instances of royall trust and favour, as 
the then and succeeding state of affairs coud allow of; to which 
and no more the Cavaliers had a just claim, and in the dispencing 
therof, justice and gratitude, as well as good policy, required 
a very impartiall application. But that the King and the politi- 
cal! maxims and veiws of that period faild therin, is Ime aflraid 
too certain, for besides the generall tradition therof handed doun 



LETTER. 421 

without much contradiction, a great many particular instances 
may be adduced, of which I will only mention one in this coun- 
trie. The Earl of Nithsdale (predecessour of him wlios now 
deprived of all his estate, and narrowlie escaped with his life, 
on account of his adherence to the interest of that person, who 
he belives hath the only j.ust title to the crown of these realms) 
sold a barrony of land or lordship, for which lie received from the 
Earl of Buccleugh 50,000/. sterling, which sum he gave to King 
Charles 2d to support him in his straits and attempt to recover 
his crowns : and yet this noble and loyall family received na 
share of the royall bountie, from the restoration to the revolu- 
tion, but a pension, and that perhaps not allwayes, of one or at most 
two hundered pounds per annum. But wher tlie confiscated estates 
or the fines were applyd as rewards to tliose who were concernd 
(actively or passively, moderately or furiouslie, tis all the same 
matter) in the rebclion r from these I think the Cavaliers had 
reason to demand and expect a full and compleat reimbursement,, 
so long as the posessors therof had one farthing left towards 
making restitution. And the King and Parliaments debarring 
them from obtaining what they were tlius so unjustly deprived of 
and was applyd towards enriclu'ng ther, the Kings and the na- 
tions enimys, was a peice of the greatest injustice and ungra- 
titude and at the same time most impolidcall, in so far as it gave 
small encouragement to those who were inclinable to serve the 
Crown and the countrie, and the effects therof line affraid are 
felt at this very time. Two out of the many instances of hard- 
ships of this nature I will mention. The Earl of Derby having 
acted a truly heroicall part, was at length beheaded and his 
estate confiscated, or according to the modern term forefaulted. 
Part of it and that the antient paternal! inheritance of the family 
from William the Conquerors time, scituated in Wales, was by 
a grant bestowd upon one, who was thought to have, and no 
doubt as matters then stood had realie more than ordinary me- 



LETTER, 

rite. As this gentleman lookel ane inch before his nose, he did 
not incline to rest his title solely on this grant, but obtaind a 
fine and recovery of this estate, which he afterwards posessd by 
this double title. After the restoration, the Derby family coud 
not have access to this estate, in virtue of the act of Parliament 
restoring the Royalists to ther estates : but as it was notorious 
that this fine and recovery was procured on no just grounds and 
whilst that noble family was under a cloud and coud not oppose 
it, ane act of Parliament was necessary to set the matter right, 
which readily past both Houses, but to the amazement of that and 
all future ages, stopt at the royall assent, and so to this day that 
noble family is deprived of that estate. This account I had from 
a loyall person nearlie allyed to it, and is line affraid too true. 
The other instance is from Scotland, wher during the rebelion, 
the committees, of what they calld a Parliament, were in use to 
raise mony, by calling for such as were Cavaliers or reckond 
such in ther hearts, and compelling them to lend such sums of 
mony as were prescribed unto them, and wher these had not 
readie cash nor credite to procure the same from others, the 
leading rich men of the partie generouslie advanced it, for which 
they got security on the malignants estate, which they declared 
shoud be preferable to all even prsevious mortgages: and the 
malignant got a bond from certain of the managers (the very 
persons for the most part who advanced the mony) acknowleging 
the receiving of the same and graciouslie obliging themselves to 
repay it, tho to have demanded it then or ever afterwards, had 
their usurpation continued, woud have been a crime with a 
witness and punishd as a certain sign of malignancie. After the 
restoration, these publick borrowers were, by ane act of Parlia- 
ment, absolved of any obligation to perform what they were thus 
bound to in a private as well as publick capacity, because for- 
sooth, the mony was borrowd on a publick (rebelious) account. 
But the poor Cavaliers, as if they were still to be reekond and 



treated as malignants, were left bound and even obliged to pay, 
what they had been eompelld to borrow from these oppressors in 
ther private capacitys, to pay back again to them in ther pub- 
lick capacitys. Now if these and many more such instances 
can be adduced, let God and the world judge if you have done 
justice to King Charles's councills in the way and manner you 
represent them. 

Very different and much more prudent and generous was the 
conduct of his predecessor King David the 2d of Scotland. In 
the beginning of his reign, his countrie was invaded and his ar- 
mies defeated by King Edward the 3d of England, and he him- 
self obliged, for his security, to retire from his native countrie to 
France, wher he continued many years, but returning at length 
to head his faithful!- subjects against the common enirny, he was 
complimented at Perth, soon after his arrival!, by almost the 
whole body of the nation, and the first tiling he did, was to call 
for a list of such persons as were killd at the batles of Duplin, 
Halidown Hill or elsewher, or were deprived of ther estates whilst 
the English continued in posession of the kingdom, and to the 
familys of all such persons as had suffered in any of these in- 
stances, or remarkably signalized themselves in the defence of the 
country, he gave rewards suitable to ther severall merits. The 
effects of which acts of justice appeard, when that prince was 
afterwards defeat and made prisoner at the batle of Durhame. 
The nobility, gentry and commons continued resolutely to man- 
tain his cause and oppose the enimy. So soon as the Estates of 
Parliament coud meet (which hapned within 3 or 4 months 
after his being made captive) they agreed and actually remitted 
(notwithstanding the heavie circumstances of the times) mony to 
defray the expence of his living, whilst a prisoner at London, and 
they resolved (to ther immortall honour be it recorded) to use 
all possible means to effectuate his releife, and accordingly did 
manfully stand ther ground against all the hostile attempts and 



424 T.ETTER. 

reject the several! dishonourable proposalls made by King Ed- 
ward, till at last he yeilded to grant honourable tho very heavie 
4errns, a no less sum than 200,000 marks being stipulated as 
King Davids ransom, for which (luige sum, in those dayes) the 
subjects of Scotland did bind themselves and sent up hostages for 
ther performance. Had King Charles the 2d followd the same 
rules of justice and generosity towards the suffering Cavaliers 
and ther familys, tis more than probable, so great numbers woud 
not have. sit with ther hands across and seen the royal preroga- 
tives trampled on and pluck out by the root, for to his unac- 
countable negligence in not sufficiently countenancing the Ca- 
valiers, may in a great measure be ascrived, the continuance at 
least, of the many misfortunes attending the royall family. 

As I am altogather a stranger to you and your charactar, youl 
do me the justice, I hope, to belive, that what I have said on these 
subjects, proceeds from no disgust or ill will to you: I own a 
great attachment to monarchy and the royall family, and as I 
am entirely satisfyed you are very well affected to both, I am so 
much the more Sir Yours, 



LETTER 
from Mr. Lockhort to his eldest Son*. 

This Letter appears to have been written between the years 1721 

and 1726. 

Dear George, 

Some few years ago, when you went abroad, I wrot a letter to 
you, containing my best advices and the reasons on which the 



* George Lockhart of Carnwath was married, April 30, 1697 to the Right 
Honourable Lady Eupheinia Montgomery, third daughter of Alexander ninth 



LETTER. *^r 425 

same were founded with regard to your charactar as a Christian 
and a gentelman. You may mispend your time more than in re- 
Earl of Eglinton by his first wife Margaret, daughter of William Lord Coch- 
rane son of the Earl of Dundonald, and had issue as follows. 

1. Margaret born 12th July 1698. 

2. George .... 18th June 1700; died 1761. 

3. Alexander . . 27th November 1701, died 17th Nov. 1782. 

4. Euphemia. . . 12th February 1703. Married John sixth Earl of Wigton. 

5. Thomas. . . . 4th February 1705. 

6. Kate ^ born 26th February 1706. 

7. Grace 5 married first John third Earl of Aboyne, and secondly James 

ninth Earl of Moray. 

8. James born . . 6th June 1707, died 15th October 1749, Lieutenant Co- 

lonel of Hacket's regiment in the Dutch service. 

9. William ... 4th August 1708. 

10. Susan 10th August 1709. 

11. Francis .... 4th October 1710. 

12. Jean 2d February 1713. 

13. Philip . . 20th July 1716, 

14. A daughter > dead born. 

15. Mary born 8th September 1718. Married John Rattray, Esq. and died 

in 1805. 

George Lockhart younger of Carnwath was married January 19th, 1726, to 
Fergusia only child of Sir George Wishart of Clifton hall, Baronet, and had 
issue as follows. 

1. George born 4th December 1726, died in exile at Paris, 1761. 

2. James . . . 16th November 1727, died at Pisa 1790, General in the Au- 

strian service, Count of the Empire &c. &c. 

3. Alexander . 4th December 1728. 

4. Clementina 13th January 1730. Married the Honourable Colonel John 

Gordon, and died 1803. 

5. John .... 19th December 1731. 

6. Euphemia . 30th June 1733. 

7. William . . 16th March 1735. 

8. Anne .... 30th December 1736. 

9. Margaret . . 8th March 1738. 

10. Charles . . . 27th February 1740. Married Miss M c Donald of Largie, 

and died 1796. 

11. Grace .... 1 4th September 1741. 

12. A son, dead born 1744. 

VOL. II. 3 I 



426 LETTER. 

vising them, now your come to riper years; for if they still stand 
the test, they will, at least shoud make a deeper impression and 
be more regarded by you. 

One thing which I then ommitted and affects me very much 
I must now represent to you in this letter, which I leave behind 
me as the last favour I, your affectionat father, have to ask of you, 
my dear child, which is this, that youd supply my place, by act- 
ing a kind and fatherly part to all my younger childeren, your 
own sisters and brothers. 

What I do earnestlie recommend to you is of its self your duly 
and interest to observe. 

The duty is implyd in the priviledges and benefites annexed by 
law and custom to the primogeniture ; for as, after my decease, 
you become the head of the family and on that account a respect 
and regard is, in a more conspicous degree, due to you from 
all my younger childeren, than any one of them can claim of an- 
other, so are you bound to employ the advantages and priviledges 
you enjoy, for ther support and protection, in so far as they need 
and merite the same. For the superiority annexed to the primo- 
geniture is not because the eldest son is one whit better than the 
younger, but because, if the estate and dignitys of a family were 
branched out and parcelld amongst the severall childeren, they 
would not have such weight and be so conducive to the gran- 
deur and support of the family, which, in this light, is to be 
reckond a litle society linked and connected togather by parti- 
cular tyes and interests. And therfore as the younger childeren 
owe a deference and regard more than ordinary to the head of 
this society, so he again is bound by reciprocall obligations to 
perform all the offices of ther naturall father, whom he repre- 
sents; and this you may observe hath been the constant unani- 
mous sentiments of all nations, in all ages, as appears from the 
sacred accounts of the patriarchal! age and all prophane historys 
antient and modern. 



LETTER. 427 

That tis your interest will appear equally evident to you; for 
the power and grandeur of a family does not altogather consist 
in the enjoyment of ane estate, tho ever so great, but in having 
freinds and dependents able and willing to stand by and support 
it; and from whom can that be expected, in such a measure of 
zeall and sincerity, as from those blood relations descended from 
the same originall and partakers of the benefites once enjoyd and 
handed down by ther common progenitors, for the confort and 
welfare of the society thus united and tyed togather by the strong- 
est obligations to mutuall love, freindship and good offices? When 
the head of a family acts a kind part, all the branches therof, 
near or far related, take pleasure in his prosperity, well knowing 
they shall in time reap a proportionable benifite from it. Whence, 
but from such motives as I represent, doth the respect or rather 
submission paid by our Highland clans to ther respective cheif- 
tans owe its originall? How many antient oppressd decayd fa- 
milys have been supported and releived by collaterall branches? 
And how often have flourishing familys been brought low by in- 
testine feuds and divisions? What ane encouragement is it to a 
rivall or enimy to set up against a family that is brokn and di- 
vided, or wher ther appears no disposition to mutuall good offices 
and assistance? On the other hand, what a great figure doth that 
family make wher the severall members of it are united in love 
and interest and are readie to stand and fall with one another ? 
Such a disposition seldom or never fails to beget both fear and 
respect. 

On a reveiw of your own times, you cannot faill to find parti- 
cular instances to verifye all I have affirmd on this head. In 
short, familys are petty states and have the same fate, and are 
subject to the same rules and guided by the same maxims as the 
most powerfull extensive kingdoms. A family that is divided 
can no more subsist than a kingdom. Subjects may be com- 
pelld by laws and a superior force, but never heartily and chear- 

3 i2 



428 LETTER. 

fully obey and support ther prince that does not cherish and pro- 
tect them, and they often desert him when he's at a pinch; just 
so, the nearest blood relations expect mutuall good offices, es- 
pecially from those that claim a superiority, and when these faill, 
ther attachment in a short time evanisheth. 

To reduce what I have said to practice, be courteous, kind 
and obliging to all your brothers and sisters, willing to assist 
them on all occasions. Let your house be as ane assembly for 
them to meet frequently and be merry, and ane asylum in case 
of distress ; and wher it happens by misfortunes and not from 
causes criminall or blameable in them, do not stand upon what 
patrimony I have alloted them and you perhaps have paid, but 
generouslie and like a true freind enable them to set out again in 
the world. Charity requires such kind of aid, in some measure, 
to all fellow Christians, and much more to such near relations 
who's low and mean circumstances dart back a reflection on you 
and the family you represent, and who by being assisted may 
recover so as to repay what you advance, and return your freind- 
ship with interest. Set yourself as a good example before them, 
and by your authority and advice restrain all vicious and encou- 
rage all virtuous habits in them. 

To be a litle more particular ; your brother Sandie* and your 
two married sisters -f- are off your hands, except in so far as love 
and services are ever to be encreasing wher occasions offer to 
shew the same to them or thers. Your sister Sussie must be 
setled in such a manner as is suitable to her unluckie circum- 
stances ; no hopes can be formed of her ever being in a condi- 

* Alexander, the second son, was educated for the Scotch bar, at which he 
made an eminent figure, and died Lord of Session, with the title of Lord 
Covington. His eldest son was equally eminent at the English bar, but was 
snatched away in the prime and vigour of his life and faculties, leaving no is- 
fcue by his wife, the present Countess of Harcourt. 

* The Countesses of Wigton and Aboyne. 



.LETTER. 429 

tion to appear in the world, but I wish she may be put in a way 
of living privately and confortably. Jeany and Mary, after ther 
mothers death, can be no wher so decentlie as with you, if your 
married, and you shoud recommend to your wife to use them 
well and take care of them as if they were her own. Jamie hath 
been ane undutifull child, and shows no inclinations to do well, 

* 

but hes young and not to be dispaird of, and he must be cherishd 
or discouraged according to his good or bad behaviour. Willy 
is a goodnatured boy : he's designd for the army, and youd take 
care he be educated and instructed in such a manner as is fit for 
one of that employment, who designs and expects to rise by it, 
and when hes of ane age fit to enter into the service, endeavour 
to place him in some corps where he may have a freind to ad- 
vise and inspect him. Philip is a child I love tenderlie, because he 
evidences a spirit capable of great things ; if hes well educated, 
in all appearance he'l prove ane honour to the family, and ther- 
fore, in the most earnest manner I recommend it to you. If Sandy 
dyes soon or comes in a few years to be advanced, then I incline 
Philip shoud be bred a Scots lawer ; but if matters goes other- 
wise with Sandy, in that case I woud have Philip bred to the 
English law, or rather a clergyman (but this must be left to the 
advice of freinds, as matters cast up) in which case his educa- 
tion must be in England when he grows a litle elder, and I de- 
sire some prudent man may be keept with him, to overlook his 
manners, health and studys. 

I think I have said enuff on these subjects, to make ane im- 
pression on any person that hath bowells of love and compassion, 
and right notions of his interest and duty. I will only add that 
when you see or think of your brothers and sisters, reckon them 
as committed in a particular manner to your care by your de- 
ceased father, who makes it his earnest and last request, and 
leaves you his blessing as you act a kind part to them ; and re- 
member if the dead know and are affected with the actions of 



430 LETTER. 

the living, his future peace will in so far depend upon your an- 
swering his expectations, as will his prayers be heard in heaven, 
and the blessing of Almighty God descend upon you and your 
own offspring ; which is earnestly desired by your most loving 

and affectionate father GEORGE LOCKHART. 

Iwr. ?;ii.rj :kili*ubi\u an* fttetf 

Upon the margin of the above letter, and in a feeble hand, was added 
" Jamie, since writing this letter, having alterd his way and behaved to my 
satisfaction, I have intirely forgot all offences in his younger years." 

[Mr. Lockhart junior, upon his father's death in 1732, fulfilled his injunc- 
tions, and was throughout life a kind and affectionate brother. EDITOR.] 



.jfi ' 



*>.' 



Letter from Mr. Lockhart to his sister-in-law Catherine, eldest 
daughter of Alexander, ninth Earl of Eglinton, and Lady 
of James Stewart, sixth Earl of Galloway. Alexander, Earl 
of Eglinton, died in 1729, leaving a numerous family by 
three wives ; and this letter appears to have been written 
soon after his decease. 

i . i i . / i ' 1 J , i p f f ' 

You are descended of a family illustrious on many more valu- 
able accounts than either antiquity or nobility; that probity 
affability and generosity which appeared in all the veiws and 
schemes therof, has justly rendered it venerable as well as ho- 
nourable in the judgement of all good men, and ther are few or 
none of us in the western shires who will not in the compass of 
a few years, less or more feel and regrate the loss of your noble 
lather. 

As his fatall death is likely to occasion a very notable revolu- 
tion in the affairs of that family, allow me, madam, from the ho- 
nor I bear towards His Lordships memory to accost Your Lady- 
ship, the nearest relation come to years of understanding, on a 
subject that merits your and all the relations most serious thoughts ; 



JLETTER. 43 1 

in doing wherof I will not trust to my own private judgement, 
but will frankly and ingenously impart what I find is the opinion 
and discourse of mankind. First then tis thought very odd that 
none of those named tutors, even those nearly tyed to the family 
by the bonds of blood or allyance, incline to accept and execute 
the trust which their noble deceased freind assuredly expected 
from them. The danger arising from ommissions is no relevant 
excuse; it may indeed affect and terrify a formall, narrow-chicken 
hearted pedant, but it can never penetrate so deep into the 
mind of a truly generous gratefull soul, as to prevent his per- 
forming the most essentiall duty to his deceast freind. He con- 
siders that man came not into this world merely for himself, but 
to act a sociall part, to assist and releive all mankind as far as 
he can, and in so far as particular freinds or near relations are 
concernd to venture and expose himself to certain degrees of in- 
convenience and danger in their service, and he is convinced 
that no subject admitts fairer or more necessary occasions to dis- 
play these generous qualitys, than in overseeing the education 
and managing the affairs of ane innocent noble minor. To what 
millions of hazards are such exposed to in this wicked genera- 
tion ? and what satisfaction must arise from the reflection of 
having been accessory in training up the heir of a noble family 
in the paths of virtue and preventing his estate from being a 
prey to others? On the other hand, how cutting and shoaking 
must be the reverse contemplation, when it appears probable it 
was in ones power to have prevented it, and how low ane opi- 
nion must the world have of that person, who rather than run a 
small hazard will stand by and see his freinds representative and 
family go to perdition ? As these and the like considerations are 
more than sufficient to affect any generous mind, such as know 
the particular regard the late Earl of Eglinton evidenced on all 
occasions towards Your Ladyship personally and the family your 
inatchd with, cant enuff admire how it comes about that My Lord 



432 LETTER. 

Galloway and his son shoud behave in a manner which sure 
their deceased freind woud have least expected from them of all 
mankind : and as the interest Your Ladyship most deservedly has 
with these is no secret, your not employing it in behalf of your 
indulgent affectionat fathers memory, cannot well be reconciled 
with those principles of honor and justice which make a part of 
your charactar, in other matters. As a good Chriatian is not 
affrighted from his duty, by the difficulties that attend it, well 
knowing that with care and vigilancy they may be surmounted, 
neither ought a true freind be frightned from acting the part in- 
cumbent upon him from the terror of ommissions. The law in- 
deed is strict, arising from the many cheats and tricks of guar- 
dians, but the law does not require what is impracticable, and 
as it is observed that what failings guardians innocently committ, 
usually proceed from their want of skill and experience in the 
methods directed by the law, any bad effects of this nature in the 
present case, might easily be prevented, by employing a person 
of knowledge, with and by whose advice every thing shoud be 
done, so that this obstacle is no just cause in the sight of God or 
man, to deterr any person from undertaking and executing ane 
office incumbent on him and to which he is inclinable: and the 
world does expect that Your Ladyship and your freinds will not 
startle at scarecrows when the all of your fathers family is the 
subject in question. 

But supposing that what I have said is not sufficient to dissi- 
pate your fears, still methinks your family shoud have showd a 
disposition to go as far as possible, and at least have come to 
toun and in conjunction with other freinds have seen what coud 
be done for selling the affairs of the Eglinton family on a right 
bottom. If they woud not act authoratively, they might at least 
have offerd good advice to others and endeavoured to obstruct 
schemes and proposalls that were unreasonable extravagant and 
detrimental!, in which they might and may probably still have 



LETTER. 433 

plenty of occasions to show their grateful! dispositions ; wheras 
sitting att home with their arms across and seeing the estate 
pulld in peiees, and measures for ought they know destructive 
to the heir of the family, concerted and followd out, gives the 
world too good grounds to censure the part they act, and think 
their concern for their deceast freind was deposited with his 
corps in church of Kilwinning. 



Letter from Mr. Lockhart to Lady Euphemia his wife. 

f is.;.' : > !t > :-.[.->.. 

My Dear, 

Wheras I have by a deed dated 3d Aprile 1729 named and 
appointed you to be my executor and legator of my goods effects 
and personall estate whatsoever in the terms therin specrfyed, and 
wheras it was not proper, in a paper which woud become pub- 
lic, to specifye my private thoughts in relation to the application 
therof and the execution of the trust I repose in you, I do ther- 
fore chuse by this to express my inclinations concerning the same, 
not doubting but you will faithfully perform accordingly, unless 
some reasons may interveen which will render your acting other- 
wise more conform to my intentions in committing this trust to 
you. 

In the first place then, as I have a particular regard to the in- 
terest of my eldest son George and his family, and as my youngest 
son Philip is of such a tender sickly constitution that he may not 
be fitt and capable to undergo such fatigues and hardships as 
my other sons, and that his education is to be defrayd off the pa- 
trimony I leave him, which was not the case of my other younger 
sons, I do therfore direct and desire that you may make over in 
favors of my said eldest son, a right to all my effects and per- 
sonall estate so disponed by me to you, provided that in leiw and 

VOL. II. 3 K 



434 I/ETTER. 

consideration therof, he give security to pay yearlie, from and 
after the first term of Martimas or Whitsunday after my death 
to my said son Phillip the sum of fourtie pounds starling (over 
and above the patrimony or interest therof appropriate by me to 
him) during all the years of the said Philips life, or untill his 
enjoying a liverent office the sallary or perquisites wherof doth 
amount to the like sum. But in case my said eldest son refuses 
to enter into this obligation, then and in that case I desire you 
may dispose of my effects and personall estate to the best availl 
and after converting the same with all convenient speed into 
mony, that you purchase a liverent annuity to my said son Philip, 
not exceeding the sum of fourtie pounds starling, and that what 
may happen to remain of my effects and personall estate after 
such purchase, be by you applyed and given to such of my two 
sons James and William or my unmarried daughters as you think 
may most need it. 

As the expences of my funeralls will affect my executory, and 
I never approved of sumptous funeralls, I do hereby positively 
require and expect that nothing accompany mine but decency. 
If I dye at any distance from Carnwath, wher I am to be interrd, 
I direct that none but my nearest freinds and relations be desired 
to attend my corps, and these not exceed the number of twentie 
at most, and to be met by my vassalls and tennants on the con- 
fines of Clidesdale. I expresslie discharge the ridicoulous trum- 
pery of flannell dead cloaths now in fashion, and I desire that I 
be only wrapt up in a clean linnen sheet. If my son apprehends 
that performing- the last ceremony to me in this manner will be 
a reflection on him in the eyes of the world, my express direc- 
tions containd in this, will be a sufficient exoneration to him and 
all concernd. 

It only now remains that I recommend my childeren and fa- 
mily to you, that as they are yours as well as mine that you ex- 
ert yourself in doing all for tliem that you can, and live in perfect 



LETTER* 435 

% 

good harmony and love with them, as becomes those that are 
linked togather in so near mutuall relations to one another, and 
is seemly in the sight of God and man ; and my blissing will 
follow them as they severally act such a part to you as becomes 
them. I leave you and them on the providence of Almighty God, 
praying he make you happy here on earth and wee all meet par- 
takers of his joyes in Heaven. Tho I write this in a very good 
state of health, as it is not to appear till the event of my death> 
you are to take it as my last Adeiw 

GEORGE LOCKHAIUV 

In case my eldest agree to the proposall above mentioned, 
which I have made with a veiw to his interest, I understand and 
mean that besides the 40J. he is to pay to Philip, that he is also 
to pay my funerall expences and all my debts, which will come 
to no great sum. 

I understand by Philips having a post of 40L profile annually, 
it is to be one suitable to a gentleman of his rank and which he 
is to obtain gratis and which he himself is willing and actually 
does voluntarily accept of when procured for him. 

Notwithstanding of what is eontaind above I remitt to you to 
give what surpluss may remain after purchassing ane annuity for 
Philip, either as above directed or to bestow it on Philips educa- 
tion and particularly to enable him to travell if he inclines to iU 

GEORGE LOCKHART. 



3 K2 






' - . 

( >U.iteil^n r 
til r. . ' ' -!rf 

Ji c-.e . t i! 

: ii -tfsl (>J s-W 



M! ; 



OKOHI 
vi/* of 



O ( OJ hi jl 



rjrlJw-qijuN 



JOURNALS AND MEMOIRS 



OF 



C|)e iotittg ^retenfcet'jai (C^etrition 

IN 1745. 



JOURNALS AND MEMOIRS 

u. * r * f f* 
OF 

oung ^retentier's Cjqpetittton ; 

In 1745. 



As there has been so many different accounts of the P. 
arivle and progress through Scotland and England, I shall 
endeavour to trace him through both till his comcing to 
Inverness, from which to the batle of Culloden there is 
already an account. As this was undertaken at the desire 
of a friend, he may rely on the facts in both, and if there be 
any mistakes in the dates he will be so good as to pardon 
them, as the memory cou'd not be so particular as to them. 

J.HE P. imbark'd at the mouth of the Loir in France the 
day of June 1 745 with eight gentlemen, a few servents, 
some money, ammunition, 1000 stand of arms, 14 or 1500 broad 
swords, on board of a small vessel that mounted six or eight 
three pounders and some swivle guns, and saild for Belleisle where 
he stay'd ten days waiting the Elizabeth of sixty guns, and when 
join'd saild for Scotland. Soon after they put to sea they mett 
with the Lion an English man of war of sixty guns who engaged 
the Elizabeth, and after an obstinate fight being both very much 
chater'd (and the Elizabeth ioseing her captain in the engage- 



440 ACCOUNT OP 

ment) they separated and retir'd each of them to their respec- 
tive ports to repair their damages. The P. notwithstanding 
what happen'd made the best of his way for Scotland and came 
in sight of the isle of Wist, and seeing three ships at sea he put 
in between that isleland and that of Eriska where they came 
to an anchor. The P. went on shore and stay'd all night, 
where a gentleman came from the isle of Wist (where Sir Alex- 
ander M'Donald had been not long before) and told him that 
things were not in readiness, and advis'd him to return. This 
cou'd not be agreeable news, but he gave no positive answer and 
went on board and weigh'd anchor, and went the next day into 
Lochnanueh in Muidart, and that day sent Kinloch Muidarts 
brother for him, and they return'd. The next day the P.. 
haveing some letters ready, dispatchd Kinloch Muidart south- 
ward (who in his way deliverd a letter to Locheill and an othere 
to Kepoch, acquenting them that the P. was come (he did not 
land till some days after) but no orders to raise their men. The 
next day young ClanRanald was sent to the isle of Skye with 
letters to Sir Alexander M c Donakl and the Laird of M c Load, 
with one to be forward to Lord Lovat. Locheill on the receipt of 
his sent to acquent Lord Lovat that the P. was come and that he 
was in possession of the papers he had formerly told him of (the 
papers it was said was his commission for being Leutenant Ge- 
neral of the Highlanders) which shoud be deliverd to him on 
the stipulated conditions; but as he had not received the P. let- 
ter he gave no othere answer but that he (Locheill) might rely 
on what he had formerly promiss'd. 

Some days after the first, Locheill received a second letter 
from the P. desireing him to come to him as soon as possible, 
which was complyd with, and he was with him (the P.) two 
days thereafter. About two hours after Locheills arivle Clan- 
Ranald returnd from the isle of Skye, but his answers did not 
seem to be so agreeable as was expected. Whatever truth there 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 441 

may be in it I shall not pretend to say, but it was said that 
M c Load sent his letter to Edinburgh to Mr. Robert Cragie the 
then lord advocate for Scotland, and on the first notice of the 
P. arivle, Sir John Cope had orders to assemble the troops 
under his command and to march northward. After some con- 
ferences (the P. was resolved to lose no time) it was deter- 
min'd to set up the standart on the 19th following. 

The next day Locheill return'd to his own country to raise his 
men, and carried money with him to Sir J. C. of A h n k, Ke- 
poch and the Steuarts of Appin, to enable them to raise theirs 
and to joine the P. as soon as possible. Kenoch whilst he was 
raiseing his men had intelligence that there was two companies 
of the Royal Scots regiment goeing from Perth to reinforce the 
garrison of FortWilliam, he intercepted them and after some re- 
sistence he made them all prisoners. 

According to agreement, on Monday the 19th of August the 
standart was carried by the Duke of Athol * from the head of 
Lochsheale (the P. quarters where Mr. Murray the secretary 
join'd the P. that morning) guarded by forty of ClanRanalds 
men to the place appointed for the Camerons (call'd six or 



* The person so styled was William Murray, Marquis of Tullibardinc, 
eldest surviving son of John first Duke of Athol by his first wife, Lady Catha- 
rine Hamilton daughter of William Duke of Hamilton. Being attainted for 
engaging in the rebellion in 1715, he resided abroad until he embarked with 
the young Pretender, at which time the family honours and estates were en- 
joyed by his next brother James, under an Act of Parliament obtained by his 
father for that purpose from King George the First. 

After the battle of Culloden, the Marquis endeavoured to gain the coast of 
Argyleshire with a view of escaping by sea ; but his health being very bad, his 
horses tiring, and difficulties increasing, he surrendered himself to a magistrate 
who lodged him in Dunbarton Castle, from whence he was conveyed to the 
Tower of London, where he arrived th 2ist of June and died the 9th of July 
1746. EDITOR. ;lt jj 

VOL. II. 3 L 



442 ACCOUNT OF 

seven hunderd men) to meet them, where it was displayed 
(but no moto on it as was said) and the manifesto was 

read; the standart was carried back to the P. quarters es- 
corted by about 50 of the Camerons, and about an hour there- 
after Kepoch join'd with about 300 men and his prisoners. The 
next day was imploy'd in carrying- the baggage, arms and am- 
munition from the head of Lochsheale to the head of Lochie 
wher the P. arrived with his attendants, where he stay'd till the 
23d, and went to Fass-fern where he lay that night and sent 
200 of the Camerons with the baggage to Moy in Lochaber, 
where he arrived the next day and stay'd to the 26th; that day 
he cross'd the water of Lochie and was join'd by the Steuarts of 
Appin, about 260 men. That night Glenbucket sent an ex- 
press to the P. acquenting him that Sir John Cope was come 
to Badcnoch and was to march by Corryarock, upon which the 
P. order'd his men to march all night to gain that pass before 
him, which they did. That night the P. lay at the castle of 
Invergarry, where Fraizer of Gortleg came to the P. to assure 
him of Lord Lovats services (the P. letter had come to his hand 
before that) and recommended as the surest way to promote 
the intrest that he (the P.) shou'd march north and 

raise the Fraizers of Strathharigag, and by that time he cou'd 
reach Inverness Sir Alexander M c Donald and M c Load wou'd 
have time to joine, as wou'd a great many of the M c Kinzies y 
some of the Grants, the Fraizers and MIntoches; but the Duke 
of A thole insisted that it wou'd be absolutly necessary that 
he shou'd appear in Athole before his brother cou'd make any 
party in that country. Mr. Murray (the secretary) join'd with 
him and added that there was no time to be lost, but to march 
to Edinburgh where (as he said) there was a great many 
ready to joine. This last advice prevail'd, and the P. left In- 
vergarry that afternoon and came to Aberchaleder, where his 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 443 

smale army lay expecting Sir J. Cope to march by Corryarock. 
That day they were join'd by Glengarries people and some 
of the Grants from GlenMorrison. Sir J. Cope being inform'd 
that it was impossible for the troops he had with him to force 
that pass (he had left the dragoons to guard the pass at Ster- 
ling) he march'd directly to Inverness where he was oblig'd to 
write to Edinburgh to send him sniping to transport him and 
army to Leith or any where to the south of the Forth, as he cou'd 
not return by land, for the P. hearing that he was passt, the 28th 
in the morning march'd up Corriarock and went that after- 
noon to Garvemore in the braes of Badenoch, where he had cer- 
taine intelligence that Sir J. Cope had taken the road for Inver- 
ness and had made such forc'd marches that it was impossible to 
overtake him. 

From Garvemore the P. sent 100 of the Camerons under the 
silence of the night to apprehend Cluny MPherson at his 
own house, which they did. There was anothere party of 200 
men sent to surprize the barrack of Ruthern or Riven of Bade- 
noch, (where there was a smale garrison of regular troops) but 
comeing too late they were discover'd, by which the designe 
miscaried. 

The 29th the P. march'd to Dalnawhiny (upon the march 
Cluny was brought prisoner to him) where several of the gen- 
tlemen of that country waited on him and assur'd him of their 
service, and the next day he march'd to Blair castle where he 
stay'd some days, dureing which Lord Nairn and several of the 
gentlemen of that country came and offer'd their service. Lord 
Nairn and Locheill was sent with 400 men to take possession of 
Dunkeld, which they did the 3d of September in the morning, 
and the P. arived that afternoon, when the was pro- 

.claim'd and the manifesto's read. The above party march'd 
that same day, and the next morning took possession of .Perth 



444 . ACCOUNT OF 

where the P. arived that evening, where the Duke * of Perlh 
join'd him. The next day Lord George Murray -f- join'd and 
was declaird lieutenant general. On his arivle a combination 
was entred into against him by John Murray the secretary, 
Mr. O'Sulivan and others, of which the P. was acquented ; but 
he being an active sturing man and well acquented with the 
situation of the country and people, he was caress'd by the 
P. and had great weight in all the opperations; notwithstand- 
ing the opposition he mett with. People having join'd from 
all parts, such necessaries as the place cou'd affoord being pro- 
vided for the army, and the taxes in the country rais'd, he 
march'd the 1 1 th to Dumblaine (which the Duke of Perth had 
made himself master of some days before) stay'd there the next 
day and cross'd the river of Forth the 13th at the Frews 5 miles 
above Stirling. Colonel Gardner, who had layn till then at 
Stirling, upon the P. approach retird to Falkirk. The army lay 
that night in an open field near Saughie, and the P. in a 
house in the neighbourhood; the 14th he march'd and sent a 

* James Drummond, eldest son of James, and grandson of James fourth 
Earl of Perth, who following King James the Second to France was by him cre- 
ated Duke of Perth, by which title his descendants were commonly styled in 
Scotland, though not recognized by the Government. His grandson James is 
referred to in the preceding Register of Letters, page 42, as being, with his bro- 
ther John, conveyed to France by their mother (Lady Jean Gordon daughter 
of George first Duke of Gordon) on receiving an account of their father's de- 
cease at Paris in 1720. James afterwards returned to Scotland and resided 
upon his estate there until the arrival of the young Pretender induced him to 
quit his retirement and share the fortunes of the Stuarts, after the destruction 
of whose hopes at Culloden,, he escaped to the coast and embarked for France, 
but died on his passage, llth May 174S, worn out with fatigue and anxiety. 
EDITOR. 

T He was third surviving son of John first Duke of Athol, and was father of 
John third Duke of Athol, and grandfather of John, the fourth and present 

Duke. EDITOR. 

- . . . . . . 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 

message to the majestrat's of Stirling who submited to him, 
but the garrison retir'd into the castle and fired several cannon 
as the army passt, but did no execution. The P. continued 
his march to Falkirk, which the dragoons had abandond a 
few hours before his arivle and retired to Linlithgow. The 
army lav that niiyht amongst some broom to the eastward of 

J J " tj 

Callender parks, and the P. in the house which belongs to the 
Earl of Kilmarnock who assured the P. of his intention to 
promote his interest, which lie gave very good proofs of after- 
wards upon all occasions, there being none more assidious or 
behaved with greater resolution and intrepidity or made a braver 
attack at the batle of Culloden than he did, notwithstanding 
his behaviour afterward. He acquented him likeways that Co- 
lonel Gardner with his dragoons was resolved to dispute the 
passage of the bridge of Linlithgow with him, upon which a 
council was call'd wherein it was resolved that 900 of the best 
arm'd men shoud march and attack him, but upon their approach 
he thought proper to retire to Kirkliston, and they entred the 
town without opposition by the break of day, and the P. 
with the rest of the army about ten o'clock that morning and 
sent several smale parties to the neighbouring seaport touns 
where they got some smale arms and ammunition. About four 
in the afternoon they march'd to a riseing ground two miles to 
the eastward where they lay that night, and the P. in a house 
not far from them, and marchd next morning towards Edin- 
burgh. Upon their approach the dragoons retir'd to Corstor- 
phin, from thence to the Coltbridge within a mile of Edin- 
burgh where they were join'd by Hamiltons (dragoons) and pro- 
pos'd to make a stand, but upon the P. coming to Corstorphin 
they retir'd precipitatly to Edinburgh, and from thence to Mus- 
selburgh. As there was no goeing farther the Edinburgh 
road without goeing within reach of the cannon of the Castle, 
the P. struck off to the right and went to a smale place call'd 



446 ACCOUNT OF 

Grays Mill where he lay that night and his men in the fields 
adjacent. Here came a deputation from the city of Edinburgh, 
but as their instructions were not ample enough they desired 
some hours longer to get new instructions, which was granted, 
but when they return'd, they were not agreeable, so that Loch- 
eill and Mr. O Sulivan was orderd to march with about 8 or 900 
men and endeavour to surprize the town, which they did by 
geting near the Netherbow port which was accidentily open'd 
to let out a coach before daylight, so they rush'd in and made 
themselves masters of the city guard and principal places of the 
town, with which they acquented the P. who march'd that 
morning by Braids-burn Grange, Priestfield, and at Dudding- 
ston made a breach in the wall of the King's park and march'd 
that way to the back of Salsberry craigs, where they lay some- 
time under cover from the Castle. The P. went into Holyrood 
house or Abbie, as it is commonly call'd, where crouds of peo- 
ple of all denominations came to see him. Quarters being pro- 
vided for the men, they march'd in that night the 17th. The 
party that surprized the city in the morning, made the procli- 
ination and read the manifesto's in form, and placed a guard of 
300 men and proper officers at the weigh-house, and othere guards 
at proper places, to hinder any communication with the Castle 
on that side, which was relieved every 24 hours whilst they con- 
tinu'd in town. They seiz'd likeways all the cannon, arms and 
ammunition belonging to the town. Some days thereafter there 
was ane officer and 50 men sent to the outside of the Castle, who 
took post on a riseing ground between the West port and the 
West kirk (or church) but not being upon his guard was sur- 
priz'd by the country people, and the captain was carried into 
the Castle by the back way. 

The 18th there was a proclimation issued out requireing all 
persons in MidLothian to deliver up all the arms and ammunition 
they had in their custody, on pain of military execution. The 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 447 

Castle fired very briskly upon the town, and threaten'd to lay it 
in ashes if those guards was not withdrawn and provisions al- 
low'd to goe into them. By the fireing the cannon a ball struck 
upon the tope of a chimny and threw doun some ston's which 
wounded Locheill and his major that was upon guard that day. 
It was propos'd to put a stronger guard on the outside of the 
Castle, to straiten it more, in order to reduce it by famine (as it 
was thought not to be very well provided) but that was objected 
too, as the Highlanders was not accustom'd to that way of doe- 
ing, and if any of them were kill'd that it wou'd be discourageing 
to the rest and make them desert. These considerations and the 
application of some of the inhabitants to hinder the town from 
being destroy'd by the Castle succeeded, and there was no guard 
sent to the outside, by which they were supply'd with what they 
wanted, but as the guard was continu'd in the inside (as above) 
there was frequent very smart fireing on both sides, but few 
kill'd. 

As there was a great many things (such as shoes, targets, tents, 
cantins &c.) wanting, a message was sent to the city to get them 
ready, as the citisens was to furnish them, and a meeting of the 
inhabitants was call'd and tax'd according to their valued rents. 
As there was an account that Sir J. Cope was landed at Dunbar 
with his troops from the north, they thought that they wou'd be 
saved the trouble of answering the demand. 

The dragoons, on the P. comeing to Edinburgh left Mus- 
selbrugh and marchd to Hedington where hearing that Sir 
J. Cope was arrived at Dunbar march'd to joine him. The 
troops were landed the 18th and marchd the 19th towards Edin- 
burgh. The P. being inform'd of it march'd out the 20th with 
his whole army to meet him, and that afternoon gain'd Carberry 
hill, from which they cou'd see Sir J. Cope's army drawn up to 
the eastward of Preston pans, with the town of Preston on their 
right. The P. continued his march along the hill till he came 



41 S ACCOUNT OF 

to Tranent where it was propos'd to attack directly, which was 
objected to as impractichable as they were situate ; and to end 
all contravercy, C. Kerr of Gradane was sent to reconnoitre the 
enemy, dureing which there was several that fired at him, and 
when he return'd he told the impossability of it without risking- 
the loss of the whole army. 

Sir J. Cope's army was drawn up with their right to the walls 
of the gardins of the town of Preston, which were thrown doun 
in several places for them to retire if needful 1 ; there was a large 
welt ditch in their front, three or four foot broad and five or six 
deej), which run round an incloscr not a pistle shot over, which 
made two ditches of that breath and depth to pass and was the 
only way that he coif d be attack'd in front ; on his left at the 
corner of that incloser his cannon and coehorns was planted on 
a highway (with the above incloser on the right and a marish on 
the left) that went to Tranent ; in his rear was the sea at no 
great distance from him, by which was the coast road to Edin- 
burgh, and on the right of his front line was a highway that 
went up to Carberryhill. By the above account of his si- 
tuation, what was to be done ? The P. army which was litle 
above 2000 men was not able to guard all those passes, tho' 
there was a show made as if he design'd to guard them all. At 
that road which went from the church of Tranent to where their 
cannon was planted, the Camerons, who guarded that pass, had 
a man shot through the arm. Night approaching, it was re- 
solved to march to the eastward of Tranent where C. Kerr, that 
was a litle before the army, Jlook a gentleman (very well mounted 
and comeing from the enemy) prisoner and carried him to Lord 
George Murray, who after examination let him goe again. By 
the time that the rear had passt the town of Tranent (it was 
dark) orders was given for the men to rest upon their arms, 
which they did on their long march and lay there till about three 
o'clock next morning when orders was given to march and to 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 449 

make the front the rear, and the rear the front. Dureing the 
night there was not the least noise or light, so that the enemy > 
that lay on the othere side of a morass at no great distance, did 
not know where they were. In obedience to the orders C. Kerr 
went along the line and desir'd that no man shou'd stirr nor 
speak a word till he returned to them, which was puntualy ob- 
served. When at the rear, he orderd them to march which was 
done with the greatest order and silence, not a man offering to 
move till he orderd them, by which the rear became the front 
and the front the rear without the least confusion. The Duke of 
Perth who had the rear the day before had the van and was con- 
ducted by a gentleman of the name of Anderson to a foord 
through a marish a litle to the eastward of Sir J. Cope's army 
where 100 men wou'd have stop'd the P. passage. It was so diffi- 
cult that every step was almost to the knee in the marish, which 
made them pass in great disorder, but meeting with no opposi- 
tion they form'd as they passt over; but the Duke of Perth in 
place of inclineing to the left, for fear of being too soon seen by 
the enemy march'd streight forward towards the seaside, by 
which the rear was a great deal nearer the enemy than the front. 
When the rear got over and all form'd, they were orderd to 
march and attack the enemy which they did about break of day 
with a great deal of resolution ; but as they advaric'd to the ene- 
my it was found by the turn of the marish that there was a great 
interval or vacancy between the left and the marsh, which Lord 
George Murray perceiveing orderd the Camerons to incline that 
way in order to occupy that ground for fear of being flank'd by 
the enemies dragoons. By that movement there became a great 
interval in the center, which the corps of reserve was order'd to 
fill up but cou'd not come up in time. The cannon (seven pieces 
of cannon and four coehorns above mention'd) fired upon them 
as they march'd but did no execution and was immediatly seiz'd ; 
and the Highlanders (who never after that did regaird cannon, 
VOL. n. 3 M 



450 ACCOUNT OF 

which bad been formerly very terible to them) continued their 
inarch, and what by their huzssa's and their fire (which was very 
brisk) put the dragoons in disorder and soon after the foot, which 
took to flight, by whicli the P. gaind.a eampleat victory, a great 
many being killd and taken prisoners. The wounded was car- 
ried to the adjacent villages and all manner of care taken of 
them ; and such of them that was able to travle was carried to 
Edinburgh and put into the infirmary there. 

After the hurry of the field was over there was information that 
their baggage was at Cockeny (a house belonging to Mr. Mathie) 
guarded by three companies of Lord John Murray's* regiment ; 
upon which Lord George Murray marclfd towards them, and 
upon his approach, Sir Patrick Murray of Aughtertire (who 
some time before had endeavourd to trapan the Duke of Perth 
under the coullcr of friendship) with othere two officers came out 
and surrenderd themselves and companies prisoners. Amongst 
the baggage the military chest was found with about 1500J. ster- 
ling in it. When Sir J. Cope and such of his officers as cou'd 
get away saw how things was goeing, they gaind the hight by 
the road that was on their right, and as there was no horse 
to pursue them they went off with some dragoons without 
disturbence to Berwick and othere places as they thought 
safest -f. 

* He was half-brother to Lord George Murray, being son of John first Duke 
of Athol by his second wife, Mary daughter of William Lord Ross, and died 
at Paris, in May 1787, a general in the British army. EDITOR. 

i Soon after this battle Mr. Lockhart of Carnwath, eldest son of the author 
of the Memoirs &e., surrendered himself to Sir J. Cope at Berwick, and on 
the 15th of October set out foj London with him under a strong guard. 
Mr. Lockhart's eldest son, George, embraced the cause of the Pretender with 
all the ardour of twenty years of age, and with that enthusiastic attachment to 
the House of Stuart which had se long distinguished that branch of his family- 
He wa* the first to carry to Edinburgh the tiding? of Sir J. Cope's defeat, was 
always foremost in every measure proposed in support of the cause, aod made 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 451 

After all was over and orders given to take care of the pri- 
soners, the P. went to Pinkiehouse where he stayd that night, 
and the prisoners was carried to Musselbrugh where the officers 
were put into a house by themselves with a proper guard, and 
the soldiers into anothere, and all due care taken of them. The 
next day the P. went to the Abbie (or Holyroodhouse) and the 
prisoners to the Canuongate. The officers was put into the Duke 
ot Queensberies lodgeing, where after their names were taken 
they gave their parole not to goe near tlve Castle nor keep any 
corespondence with the P. enemies, and to send to the guard at 
the Abbie the names of the houses where they quarterd and not 
to change their quarters without giveing notice where they re- 
moved too, and to answer when calld for, upon which they were 
set at liberty, and the commone men that were well were put into 
the Cannongate church till such time as it shoud be dctermin'd 
what was to be done with them. 

^'Notwithstanding the above indulgence to the officers one of 
them went the next day into the Castle, which occasion'd their 



eo conspicuously obnoxious to the House of Hanover, that, notwith- 
standing his great connections and the powerful interest that was made for him, 
King George the Second could never be prevailed upon to pardon him, and he 
died at Paris in 1761, a few months before his father, who had not had sufficient 
time and opportunity to appeal to the humane and generous feelings of our then 
young and now afflicted and venerable sovereign. Air. Lockhart's surrender of 
himself to Sir J. Cope after an engagement so advantageous to a cause which 
undoubtedly had his best wishes, has been ascribed to his conviction that the 
Pretender's means were in no degree equal to the attainment of the great object 
he had in view, and that in case of the failure of the enterprize his surrender 
would secure his fortune ; while on the other hand, in case of the Pretender's 
success, his son's ardour and zeal would cover the apparent defection of the 
father, which indeed was probably known and consented to by his son and his 
friends. Government seems to have put this interpretation upon Mr. Lock- 
hart's conduct, for he was not permitted to reside in Scotland until sortie time 
after the suppression of the rebellion, and the county of York was assigned as 
a spacious *rt of prison, whither he repaired with his family^ and resided there 
a considerable time. EDITOR. 

3M 2 



452 ACCOUNT OF 

being call'd together some days thereafter, and being told the 
reason of it they exclaim'd very much against him as being in- 
consistent with an officer and a man of honour to break his pa- 
role, which most of them forgot when they were sent to Perth 
and othere places, tho' they had given it in writeing. There was 
a great many soldiers sent north likeways, to be keept as pri- 
soners; and such as had been sent to the infirmary, when re- 
coverd had pasports given them to goe where they pleas'd upon 
taking an oath that they shoud not carry arms against the P. 
before the 1st of January 1747, which the most of them did. 

The P. return cou'd be no ways agreeable to the cilisens of 
Edinburgh, by which they found that they woud be obligd to 
comply with his former demands, which they did as fast as possi- 
ble the things cou'd be got ready. On his return there was severale 
proclimations issued from time to time for the good disipline to- 
be keept in the army and for the benefite of the citisens, and all 
encouragement given to the country people to bring provisions 
and othere goods to the toun, which was always well supplyd 
with necessaries. 

There was a message sent to the toun of Glasgow to send in 
a contrebution, which they did, and so soon as the tents was de- 
liver'd by the city of Edinburgh, the P. orderd the army to in- 
camp in a field to the eastward of Duddingston where he lay 
some nights himself and went into the Abbie in the morning for 
the dispatch of business. 

This victory was heard of every where and gave great life to 
the undertakeing, which being confirmd made a great many ap- 
pear in that intrest which otherways woud not have done it, so 
that there was people joining every day whilst he lay at Edin- 
burgh. 

The most of people seems to be surpriz'd that the P. did not 
pursue the advantage of this victory and march into England 
whilst they were in such a consternation and panick; but if 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 45$ 

those people had known the state of his affairs at that time, their 
surprize might perhaps cease. Tis true he had got between 2 
and 3000 men together ill provided of every thing filing for an 
army ; notwithstanding the arms that was found in the city of 
Edinburgh there was a great many of his men at the batle of 
Gladsmoor (as it was calld) or Preston that had nothing but 
pieces of old sciths fixt to the ends of long poles for want of 
arms ; and after the batle the most of the arms that was taken 
there the Highlanders took the locks off them and sold them, 
which render'd them of no service. Twelve or fourteen cartload 
of them were sent north to be filed up for the men that was rais- 
ing there, and much about that time there was an account of 
a ship arriveing on the north coast with money, arms, ammuni- 
tion and six piece of brace cannon which was noways to be left 
behind. 

With the same ship Monsieur du Boyer came as ambassador 
from the King of France (and a gentleman was sent by the P. 
to the Court of France to give an account of his success and to 
desire more supplys) and he went directly to Holyroodhouse 
where he was most gratiously received, hut did not take the 
title of Ambassador for some time after, tho' all the P. people re- 
gaird'd him as such. 

After giveing what arms was necessary for the new rais'd men 
in that country, the remainder of the arms &c. was conducted 
to Aloa (or Alowa) where C. Kerr was sent to receive them and 
to conduct them to Edinburgh ; and in order to secure their pas- 
sage over the Forth there was a battery raisd on the key at Aloa 
where six piece of cannon was mounted and anothere at Elphis- 
ton pans. This battery was of great service afterwards in order to 
hinder smale vessels or arm'd boats to come up to interrupt the 
passage. The batteries being finisht and the cannon mounted, 
the arms &c. was put on board some smale vessels and landed: 



454 ACCOUNT OP 

safe at Elphiston pans without interruption and conducted to 
Holyroodhouse where the artiliry park made an appearence, 
being fourteen piece of cannon, including Sir J. Cope's, four coe- 
horns and all Cope's waggons &c. 

Dureing the P. stay at Edinburgh orders was given to collect 
the taxes of all kinds, and to the collectors to produce their books 
and to pay in to those appointed by the P. all moneys remaining 
in their hands belonging to the Goverment, under the pain of 
military execution, for which there was parties sent out to assist 
the collectors appointed by the P. and the custum houses of LeitU 
Borowstoness &c. was seiz'd and the goods sold. 

The P. went to the camp at Duddingston every day, which en- 
cressd daily by more or less joining, so that they made a good 
appearence and in great spirits. There being no great hop's of 
more men joining soon, he begane to think of moveing but was 
at a loss what route to take, which seem'd to be a question, as 
the intelligence from England did not answer expectation. There 
was certain accounts that Marshall Wade was at New Castle 
with the 6000 Dutch auxiliaries and othere troops under his 
command, so it was at last resolv'd to march to Dalkieth where 
it was resolved to take the Wester road and march by Carlisle 
as being the freest of troops on that side, which wou'd give his 
freinds in England the better opportunity of joineing him. 

On the 2d of November the Duke of Perth left Dalkieth with 
the cannon, waggons and heavy baggage, with several regi- 
ments to escort them towards Carlisle, but when they came to 
Loekerby the guards upon the baggage &c. was not socare full 
as they ought to have been, by which a great many of the horses 
and baggagemen made their escape, which occasiond about forty 
carts with provisions, stor's &c. to be left behind which were 
carried to Dumfries, for which they were call'd to an account 
afterwards. 



THE YOUNG PRSTENDER'!* OPERATIONS. 455 

In order to conceal their real designe, the P. march'd the 
next day (I he 3d) by the way of Lander to Kelso with the 
clans and some of the horse, and sent orders to Wooler (a village 
about twelve miles from Kelso on the English side on the Easter 
road from London to Edinburgh) to provide quarters and pro- 
visions for them two days thereafter. He stayd one day at Kelso 
and sent C. Kerr into the English side with a party of horse to 
get intelligence; lie returnd that night with an account that 
the dragoons that was at Wooler to observe their motions had 
retir'd from thence upon hearing of the P. goeing that way. 
The next morning the P. cross'd the Tweed at Kelso and 
inarch'd to Jedburgh, from thence to Hawick, Hagiehaugh 
and Long-town on the English side, the place of rendezvous 
where they were join'd by some of the horse that was with 
the Duke of Perth. When they entred England they drew their 
swords and huzza'd, but in drawing them, Locheill cut his hand, 
which was look'd on as a bad omen. The foot came not up till 
the next day when they all cross'd the river Eden at Rowcliff 
four miles below Carlisle, and lay that night in the neighbouring 
villages, and next day march'd to Harraby, Blackball, Boutch- 
erby and othere villages to the southward of Carlisle, and sent 
a message the 10th to the mayor to deliver up the town, which 
being refus'ci, orders was given to form the blocade, but intelli- 
gence being received that Marshall Wade had left New Castle 
and was marching by Hexham in order to relieve Carlisle, that 
project was dropt, and orders to the whole army to march to 
Brarnpton to wait for him there. The next day C. Kerr was 
sent out with a party of horse to reconnoitre, who hearing that 
there was some of Wade's parties at Haltwhisle (or Haltwesel) 
march'd that way, but comeing near the place found it to be a 
false report, so he went in and refreshed his men and horses and 
hearing nothing of the enemy returnd to Brampton and made 
his report accordingly. However they continued there some 



456 ACCOUNT OP 

days and hearing nothing of him (Wade) it was resolved to be- 
siege Carlisle in form. The Duke of Perth had the direction of 
it, and Lord George Murray cover'd the siege and for that pur- 
pose took up his quarters at Harraby as being most contiguous 
and on the highway to Penreth, and the othere troops under his 
command in the neighbouring villages (the weather was very 
cold being both frost and snow) and Glenbucket with some 
othere trops was order'd to goe to Rickerby on the north side of 
the river to hinder any succours to goe into the toun by the 
bridge ; and the Duke of Perth with those designd for the siege, 
under the cloud of night went through the inclosers and placed 
themselves under the cover of one of the ditches which they 
highten'd by throwing up some ground which coverd them from 
the cannon on the English gate. There they proposd to erect a 
battery of cannon to make a breach in the wall to the eastward 
of the English gate, from which and all along the walls they 
fired very briskly next morning when they found that they were 
there, but did litle execution. Lord George Murray went into 
the trenches (as they were called) that night, and after seeing 
what was doeing, he desir'd the Duke of Perth, in case of any 
thing extraordinary happening, to let him know and he wou'd 
doe all in his power to assist him with what he wanted ; what 
privite orders the Duke had was not known, but whatever hap- 
pend he sent to .Brampton (seven miles distant) where the 
P. was and acquented him with it and took no notice of Lord 
George, tho' the older officer and sent there to cover the siege. 
As he thought he was intitled to know what past in the trenches 
he complain'd but had no satisfactory answer, whereupon he 
wrote to the P. acquenting him (in a very polite manner) that 
he thought he was ill us'd, that being intrusted with such a com- 
mand he thought that he was intitled to know what past under 
his command, and that if he was in the least suspected by his 
he desir'd him to take his charge off his hand and that 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 457 

lie woud serve as a volentier with the last drop of his blood, or 
something to that purpose. This to be sure woud surprize the 
P. very much; however there was no notice taken of it ; the toun 
surrender'd in two or three days (without a battery being rais'd 
and of consequence not a cannon fired) and the castle the next 
day, and the Duke of Perth took possession of them in the 
name, and the P. the next day with all the army, where matters 
was comprimis'd with Lord George Murray, and he continued 
in his command in which he acquite himself upon all occasions 
with the greatest zeal and activity. 

After a few days rest to the men after their fatigue, and every 
thing setled for the good and pi'eservation of the place, a smalu 
garrison was left under the command of one Hamilton as go- 
vernour, and the P. with his army march'd to Penreth, Kendell, 
Lancaster and Preston, so fatale to the Scots that they never 
coud get beyond it, but Lord George Murray, in order to evade 
the freet (or superstition which the Highlanders are full of) 
cross'd the bridge and quarter'd a great many of the men on that 
side of the water, where they halted next day expecting some in- 
telligence, in which tis to be presum'd they were disappointed. 
However they march'd to Manchester (where they halted a day 
in expectation of numbers joining) where there was a sort of a 
regiment form'd. All the bridges being said to be brocken doun 
every where, to stop their passage, C. Kerr was sent out with a 
party to examine the foords, and he cross'd at Galley foord and 
went to Cheadle foord and return'd to Manchester and made his 
report. The cannon and heavy baggage went by Gatley foord, 
and the troops by Cheadle. Lord George Murray march'd to 
Congleton (the P. to Macclesfield) with a strong party of horse 
and foot, and sent C. Kerr with a smale party of horse and foot 
towards New Castle under line, where the Duke of Cumberland 
with his army (computed at between 8 and 9000 foot and 2 and 
3000 horse and dragoons besides what was marching to join 

VOL. II. 3 N 



458 ACCOUNT OF 

him) lay, lo see to get intelligence. When he came to Talker- 
hill (not far from the Duke's army) he surpriz'd the famous 
Captain Weir (or Vere) well known to all about Court, and car- 
ried him to Congleton, from which he was sent to the P. to be 
examin'cl. From Congleton Lord George march'd by Leek to 
Ashburn, and the P. lay that night at Leek and next morning 
early march'd to Ashburn where he made a halt to refresli his 
men, and continued his march with the whole army to Derby, 
where there was a great many people taken up on suspition of 
being spys, tho' none of them pvvn'd it but one Birch (or Burch) 
son to one of the principal traders in Manchester, and he was 
coinmiled in particular to the care of an officer of the guard, by 
whos negligence lie made his escape and was no more heard of. 

'Tis to be observed that after the P. past Preston all the 
bridges where he was to pass were all brock doun and the foords 
spoil'd in order to hinder his passage, but that was a needless 
precaution, for Highlanders gives themselves no great trouble 
about a bridge, if the water be any way fordable. . i 

Orders was given for the collecting all the publick moneys as 
also the association money (which was done every where where 
they past) sign'd for by particular persons for raising men for 
the Goverment. 

The next thing to be considerd of was what was to be done ; 
they were now at Derby, with an army not half the number of 
what they were reported to be, surrounded in a manner with re- 
gular troops on all sides and more than double their number. 
To goe forward there was no encouragement, for their friends 
(if they had any) had keept litle or no correspondence with them 
from the time they entred England. If they past Swarkston 
bridge not far from Derby, which of necessaty they must doe to 
goe either to London or Wales, they were credibly inform'd that 
there was orders to cut the bridge behind them to hinder their 
retreat, which if done they must fall a sacrifice to their enemies. 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER^ OPERATIONS. 459 

As they had no assurance of assistance even if they went forward, 
and as they had intelligence of Lord John Drurnmomrs* arivle 
in Scotland with his regiment (a great many of them was taken 
prisoners in their way over and carried into England) and some 
Irish picquets from the Irish regiments in France, commanded 
by Brigadier Stapeiton (with 4 piece of brass cannon eight 
pounders, two of sixteen and some smale arms with profusion 
(as was said) of warlick stor's) which with what was rais'd by 
Lord Louis Gordon and others were calld about 5000 men (Lord 
Louis some time before had defeat a party at Inverury (where 
the Laird of M c Load narrowly made his escape with some otheres) 
but no doubt augmented the number, it was resolved to return 
to Scotland and to send orders to Lord John Drummond who 
was commander in chief of the French troops (see his declara- 
tion in the Magazine) to march with all expedition with the 
whole forces and to joine the P. on the borders. The next day 
(6th of December) they set out for Scotland, and when they 
came to Preston, the Duke of Perth was dispatch'd with a party 
of their hussars for his escort to hasten their march, but when he 
came near Penreth, he was attack'd by a party of the country 
militia, and finding that he cou'd not make his way he returnd 
to Kendell where the P. was come to by that time. 

When the P. came to Lancaster he had some thoughts of 
making a stand and wait the Duke's comeing, and as he arived 
early, C. Kerr was sent out to examine the foords on the river, 
where there was any possability of troops passing, and to chuse 
the properest ground to come to action if oblig'd to fight. The 
nearest place that the Duke cou'd foord the river was at a mill 
about two miles above the town, and the ground in case of a 

* He was next brother to the Duke of Perth, on whose death in 1746 he as- 
sumed that title and died unmarried in 1747, a major-general in the French 
service. 

3N2 



460 ACCOUNT OP 

batle was on a large moor above the gallo's. As the party that 
might be sent to defend the passage of the foord was at too great 
a distance to be supported and must weaken the main body, 
which was not 4000 men (notwithstanding all that was said of 
them) it was thought proper to march, which they did after 
giveing the men a days rest. That day of the halt C. Kerr was 
sent out with a party of horse to reconnoitre, who seeing a party 
of the Duke's horse upon a riseing ground above the town (who 
was come a reconnoitreing likeways) he march'd towards them, 
which they perceiveing made off but was so clossly pursued that 
several of them was taken prisoners (but more of their horses 
which they abandon'd and saved themselves amongst the inclo- 
sers) which, after he had gone to a riseing ground at some di- 
stance where he saw a great way round and seeing none of the 
enemy, he carried to the town (Lancaster) and they proved to 
be of Oglethorp's rangers. 

The next day they march'd, and when at a litle distance from 
the toun the bells begane to ring, and soon after the word went 
from the rear to the front that the enemy was appearing, upon 
which orders was given for the P. army to form, which they did 
with a great deal of chearfullness, but finding the alarm to be 
fals they pursued their march to Kendell, where Lord George 
Murray's servents goeing into the toun before there was a suffi- 
cient number to protect them, four of his horses was taken away 
and never heard of more. 

When they came to Kendell there was new defficulties attended 
them, which was as they were to take the mountain road to Pen- 
reth which was two days march and what carriages they had was 
mostly of the four wheel'd waggons which did very well in the 
plain country but wou'd not in the mountains, and few or none 
of the smale carts to be got in and about Kendell, march they 
must; and Lord George Murray, as he had the van all the way 
goeing to Derby he had the rear in marching back, the baggage 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 461 

was left to his care with about 300 men to escort it, and the P. 
marching the next morning, Lord George was left to goe with 
the baggage. After he had got what smale carriages he cou'd, 
he set forward and with a great deal of trouble (what with the 
smale carts breaking and the stops by the waggons when they 
came to any thing of a precipice or bad step on the road) he 
reach'd a farmer's house about four miles off near the foot of a 
steep hill, which he endeavour'd to mount, but in vain, so that 
he was obliged to put his men under cover the best manner he 
cou'd that night (which was very stormy) and next day to get 
what smale carts he cou'd in the neighbourhood to carry what 
was in the waggons ; which not being sufficient he was oblig'd 
to throw a great deal of the pouder into a large pool of water, 
to damnifie't so as to be of no use to the enemy, which done he 
set forward till he came to a bridge at the foot of an o there 
mountain steeper than the former, where the water being much 
swel'd by the rains that had falen the night before, was not 
fordable, which oblig'd the carriages to take the bridge, which 
being without ledgets, by the carlessness of the driver a cart with 
four horses fell over the bridge, which was got out with great 
deficulty but the horses so spoil'd that they were fit for nothing, 
and in order to make every tiling as easie as possible, what things 
was fit for use was put into the smale carts that had cannon ball 
(which was by no means to be left behind) and twelve pence 
ofter'd by Lord George for every cannon ball that shou'd be 
brought to him at Schap (which was about two miles distance) 
by which the most of them was carried forward and the money 
payd. After they past that bridge severale of the Duke's light 
horse appear'd on the bights in the rear but never came near, 
tho it was under night before they got to Schap, but in the night 
time they gave frequent alarms but made no atempts eithere to 
surprize or carry off the baggage. The next morning he march'd 
for Penreth and at a litle distance from Schap perceived some of 



462 ACCOUNT OP 

the light horse not far from the highway, who took to flight when 
he advanc'd, and he continu'd his inarch through a large moor, 
the country people or some of the light horse appearing on the 
bights on all sides. As he came off' the moor the light horse 
gather'd together from all sides in a confus'd manner (about 50 
or 60 horse with musick playing) near a village upon a riseing 
ground, but so soon as a few of the Highlanders made towards 
them they went off'. If they had had the least thought or judge- 
ment they might have made themselves masters of all the bag- 
gage and cannon ; for if they had had the precaution to have 
throw r n doun in different places part of the two stone walls on 
the sides of the highway near the village, it won'd not have been 
possible for the baggage &c. to have past without a great deal of 
trouble and more time than they (the Highlanders) had to spare; 
however as that was neglected they continued their march, not 
without a great many stops occasional by the frequent breaking 
of the carriages, and in particular on the moor near Lord Launds- 
dens parks, where they were detain'd near two hours, by two of 
them breaking, to supply which they were oblig'd to send to the 
neighbouring villages. By the time they were in march the light 
horse begane to appear again, and word being sent to Penreth, 
there was some horse orderd out to their assistence, and when 
the baggage came to Clifton moor it was sent forward to Penreth 
with a smale escort as being then out of danger, and it was pro- 
pos'd to see if they cou'd surprize them, which was readily agreed 
too. Lord George Murray had been frequently at Lowther hall 
(Lord Laundsdens house) and said that he was very well ac- 
quentcd with all the inclosers and parks about the house and 
that he wou'd be the guide himself. There was a farm house at 
the foot of the moor w r here there was some hussars placed under 
cover of the house, with otheres stragleing about for a decoy, and 
Lord George with the foot (about 300) and some horse marcht 
throw' Clifton and turn'd down to Lowtherhall where they found 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 403 

the outer gates shut ; they were dcsir'd to be open'd, but no an- 
swer was made, on which there was some of the Highlanders got 
over the walls, which being seen from the house, a man on horse- 
back and anothere on foot rush'd out and being pursued were 
taken ; the one proved to be a footman of the Duke of Cumber- 
land's who had come to acquent them that the Duke was to be 
there that night, and being examin'd he said that the Duke had 
lain within four miles of that, last night with 4000 dragoons, and 
that the foot was following him. Upon this, C. Kerr was sent 
to acquent the P. with it, but before he got there, the hussars 
had acquented him that the dragoons was appearing on the top 
of the moor, upon which the P. (who was reviewing his men on 
the moor above Penreth) order'd some of them to inarch to re- 
inforce Lord George who by that time was return'd, upon the 
advice he had received, to Clifton and taken possession of the 
hedges on both sides of the road that leads into the town. When 
the dragoons and light horse was form'd, orders was given for 
some of them to dismount and to attack the hedges, which was 
done with a great deal of bravery and defended with the same. 
The principal attack was made on that side where Lord George 
was, who seeing the dragoons marching that way, march'd down 
with Cluny and the M c Phersons who after receiveing the enemies 
fire, gave theirs and some of them attackt sword in hand which 
made the dragoons retire. The fireing was brisk on the othere side 
too where C. Kerr commanded, where M c Donald of Lochgarry 
(who commanded Glengarries men) was wounded. Night come- 
ing on put an end to that affair, and both parties retired, the 
Duke, it was said, towards Apleby, and the Highlanders to Pen- 
reth. The publick papers acknowledged about forty of the dra- 
goons being kill'd and the officers wounded, but there was a 
great many more, and the loss on the othere side did not exceed 
1 2 men. Captain Hamilton, who belong'd to the P. hussars was 
taken prisoner after being sore wounded by the dragoons; he 



464 ACCOUNT OF 

was not well mounted and quit his horse when the hussars re- 
tired upon the dragoons appearing on the top of the moor; he 
thought that he might make his escape on foot throw the inclo- 
sers or conceal himself amongst the hedges, but being perceived 
he was pursued and taken prisoner befor Lord George with his 
men came up; this happen'd the 18th of December. 

It was very lucky the takeing of the footman, for otherewayes 
the Duke might have rnarch'd into Penreth without being per- 
ceived, for till then there was not the lest notice of his being so 
near at hand. As Lord George retired he left guards at the 
bridge and sent anothere to guard a foord at a mill not far from 
that, to hinder the dragoons from passing eithere of those ways, 
and as those that was at the bridge had been much fatigued, 
Kepoch and his men were orderd to guard those pass's. 

The P. intelligence was so very bad that notwithstanding all 
the pretended friends he is said to have in those countries, he 
had not the least notice of the dragoons being in pursute of him, 
till the Duke's footman was taken ; and as he was uncertain of 
his numbers or what foot was following them, and lest they shou'd 
cut between him and Carlisle he march'd out of Penreth that 
night and goto to Carlisle next morning (where he staid that day) 
where all the cannon but 3 (of what was call'd the Sweedish 
pieces) was left with the coehorns and a great deal of the bag- 
gage for want of horses to take them forward. 

It was not doubted but at his (the P.) arivle there but that 
there wou'd be certain intelligence of Lord John Drummond's 
haveing passt the Forth and well advanc'd towards the borders, 
but that failing, there was a garrison (not doXibting but that they 
wou'd be soon relieved) appointed (not 300 men) to continue 
there, and Mr. Hamilton governour as formerly. 

The next day (the 20th a very remarkable day) the P. march'd 
from Carlisle and cross'd the river Esk very deep that night near 
Greatley green, and as there was no conveniency of quarters if 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 465 

they Iceept all togethere, they seperate upon the banks of that 
river. The P. went with one division and the bag-gage that 
night to Annan, Lord George Murray to Eccelfechen with au- 
othere, and Lord Elcho with the horse to Dumfries, who's pre- 
sence wou'd not be agreeable there, as they had the carts that 
was left at Lockerby as the Duke of Perth past southward to ac- 
count for. Lord George set out next day and marchd by Mof- 
fet, Douglas, Hamilton to Glasgow, where he staid till the P. 
came up by Dumfries, Drumlenrig, Douglas and Hamilton to 
Glasgow (from which the Duke of Perth was sent to hasten his 
brother's march) where they staid about^erght days and made 
the town furnish what was thought requisite to equipe the High- 
landers in cloaths &c. and then marchd, the P. by Kilsyth with 
One column to Bannockburn, and Lord George by Cumbernauld 
to Falkirk, where there was a certain account of the surrender of 
Carlisle by two gentlemen that made their escape from thence, 
tho' doubted by many after that. 

From the time that the P. enter'd Scotland there had been se- 
veral messages sent to Lord John Drummond to march with all 
expedition to joine him, with which he did not doubt he wou'cl 
be able to return to the relief of Carlisle, but to his great disap- 
pointment he was oblig'd to continue his march as above. Being 
come to Bannockburn, as the gaining the castle of Stirling wou'd 
be of the greatest consequence for the passage of his troops from 
the north side of the Forth, the siege was resolved upon, and for 
that purpose the cannon that came with Lord John was brought 
forward with a great deal of deficulty, and one Monsieur Gour- 
don (alias le Marquis de Mirabelle, nome de guere) a French 
engenier had the direction of it, and anothere young man that 
had apply'd himself to that business (a volentire never in com- 
mission) and ten or twelve French gunners (which was all of 
that kind that came from France) who was cover 'd by the Duke 
of Perth and four or five hundred men. The engenier to show 

VOL. ii. 3o 



466 ACCOUKT OF 

his dexterity in his profession (not considering that lie had nei- 
ther all things necessary for such an undertaking nor regular 
troops that had been accustomd to such undertakeingfi) made his 
approaches on the strongest side of the castle where there was 
nothing but rock and chingle to work upon, so that in order to 
raise the batteries that was intended, there was nothing but forc'd 
earth which was to be carried from a great distance and at a 
great expence, and when finish'd was commanded by the castle, 
by which there was a great many men lost arid the battery of 
litle use; however the work was continued rathere than oppose 
his schem's tho' it was agreed that the approaches might have 
been made and to better purpose on the othere sideinui 

After some time Lord John Drummond begane his march and 
got the lenth of Aloa, Polmais and othere places where they past 
the Forth, and in order to interrupt their passage the Pearl and 
Vulture sloops of war and othere arm'd boats and smale vessels 
(with woolsacks round their sides to cover their men from the 
smale shot) came up to Borowstoness road where the sloops came 
to an anchor, and the arm'd boats and transports went up to 
Kincardin (on the north side of the Forth) where they landed 
some men, but hearing that some Highlanders was marching 
towards them, they reimbark'd and return'd to the above road 
that night. 

Upon there first appearence (they were seen from Falkirk 
where Lord George Murray commanded) Lord George sent to 
acquent the P. and sent C. Kerr to Airth and Elphistonpans to 
give proper orders in case they shou'd atempt to land on that 
side, which done and the transports &c. return'd (as above) he 
return'd to give Lord George an account of what past. The P. 
\ipon the advice sent him orderd four field pieces with C. Grant 
(who had the direction of the artilery) and some gunners to 
march directly to Elphistonpans, where they arrived early next 
morning, and seeing one of the sloops had come near to Airth 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 467 

(to cover their boats that they had sent in the night to burn two 
smale vessels that had been of use to the Highlanders, which they 
did all along the coast) he took them down to Airth where they 
exchanged several shot to no purpose, which C. Kerr seeing or- 
derd them back again to Elphistonpans where they were of 
greater service. As soon as the tide served (about 9 o'clock) 
next morning, they weigh'd anchor from the road and came 
near the pans (where a battery was erected to hinder them from 
goeing to Aloa to stop the passage, if they atempted it) and 
came to an anchor near the battery which they endeavourd to 
demolish, in order to land there men with the greater safty un- 
der the cover of their cannon, but they were so well received that 
the Pearl (that lay next the battery) was oblig'd (as soon as the 
tide serv'd to carry them down) to leave one of her anchors and 
return'd that night to Borowstoness road, and the next the whole 
transports went to Leith where they landed their troops and re- 
paird their damages. 

As the regular troops had been assembleing for some time in 
and about Edinburgh, and there was advice that they were to 
march for Falkirk and that orders was sent to Linlithgow to 
make preparations for them, Lord George Murray form'd a dc- 
signe to carry off the forage and provisions that was provided, for 
which he march'd from Falkirk early in the morning and arrived 
at Linlithgow between 9 and 10 o'clock, where he gether'd to- 
gether as many carts as carried away all that was provided for 
them, and sent off directly to Falkirk. Whilst this was a doeing, 
the party Lord George had sent out to reconnoitre sent advice 
that there was a party of dragoons appearing, upon which he 
orderd all to arms. As the dragoons advanc'd, the reconnoi- 
treing party retir'd towards the town, by which time Lord 
George had got all his men together and march'd out to meet 
ilie enemy who (by that time pretty near the town) seeing Lord 

3o2 



468 ACCOUNT OF 

George marching towards them, thought proper to retire, which 
they did in very good order. Lord Elcho, who commanded the 
P. guards, was order'd to pursue them, but cou'd not come up 
with them. Hunter of Burnside and Mr. Vane (an English gen- 
tleman) distinguished themselves and follow'd the dragoons closa 
in the rear till they came to a litle village where their foot was 
halted. On perceiveing of them they returnd and gave an ac- 
count of their being there, on which Lord George returnd to 
Linlithgow, took his dinner (which had been orderd at his come- 
ing to toun) and refresh'd his men, during which, the parties he 
had left abroad sent advice that the enemy was in full march 
towards him, on which he orderd his men to arms, and as he did 
not know the number of the enemy he did not care to risque any 
thing but marchd off, and whilst he was marching through the 
toun, the enemy was got to the hight on the south side of it. 
Lord George continuing his march to the bridge, propos'd to stay 
for them, but they contented themselves with sending some dra- 
goons after him to observe his motions, who seeing him pass the 
bridge, they drew up, by which he concluded that they were to 
goe no further, and he continued his march to Falkirk where his 
body was arived before him. From thence he acquented the P. 
of what happen'cl, and went the next day himself, when it was 
propos'd to wait the enemy at Falkirk, not doubting but before 
the enemy cou'd get that lerith, that Lord John Drummond with 
all those on the north side of Forth wou'd be over to their assist- 
ance; but that failing, Lord George thought proper to retire 
with his men to Bannockburn, where after reconnoitreing all the 
grounds about for a proper place to give the enemy batle in case 
they shou'd advance, the moor to the westward of the Torwood 
was agreed upon and appointed to be the place of randivouz iri 
case of an alarm. 

In a few days thereafter, the last of Lord John Drummond's 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 469 

men got over, and a day or two thereafter the P. orderd a general 
review. When he came to the ground and saw the good ap- 
pearance his men made, it was resolved to march directly and 
attack General Hally (who had been incamp'd for some days at 
Falkirk) and accordingly the march was begun with a great 
deal of chearfuleness towards Dunnypace, where they cross'd 
the water. When they came to the westward of the Torwood 
(Lord John Drummond went to the eastward of it with a strong 
party to intercept any of the enemy that might goe that way) 
they cou'd perceive General Rally's scout's goeing from time to 
time to give notice of their approach, upon which he orderd his 
men to leave their camp (where if he had stay'd he cou'd not 
have been attack'd but with great disadvantage) and to march 
up the hill to the southward of the town, a ground no ways fit 
for his purpose, nor was it possible for him to get up his cannon, 
the road was so very bad; but as he was first there, he had the 
choise of the ground, which was so very unequall that nether of 
the parties cou'd see from their right to their left. 

As the P. advanc'd parties drew near Dunnypace they cou'd 
see General Hally marching to the hight, so that he gain'd it 
too in two lin's; the first (which consisted of the clans) form'd 
as they march'd, but there was none of the second came to their 
ground but the Athole men and Lord Ogilvies, the attack being 
begune before they came up. The first line march'd to the 
ground appointed them ; Lord Elcho with the P. guards was or- 
derd to cover the right flanck, with a morass (or moss) on his 
right; the front line made a movement forward and at the same 
time inclin'd to the right, by which, when the attack was made, 
there was no possability of advanceing without goeing through 
that moss, which several of them atempted to doe but found it 
impractickable, several of their horses haveing fain into the peat 
holes and with great deficulty got out again, which put a stop 



470 ACCOUNT OF 

to the othere gentlemens following them, which occasioned some 
reflections to be thrown on that corps, which made a great many 
of them make a resolution never to come to action again on horse- 
back. 

Tis impossable to keep Highlanders in on place, for they must 
all ways be in motion, so there was a necessaty to begine the at- 
tack, which was the occasion of the second lin's not forming as 
above, which they did with all the resolution and regularity im- 
maginable (which was done likeways on the othere side in or- 
der to recover what they had lost at Gladsinoor) and keept up 
their fire till within half a pistleshot of the enemy, that C. Kerr 
gave orders to fire, which put the enemy into such confusion that 
it was not in their officers power to rally them again; so that 
after their first fire (which they did very well) they never had 
time to charge again, and being closs pursued they were beat 
out of the field. Kepock, who had the right of the P. army that 
day, seeing some armd men to the left of the dragoons, brock 
the line without orders and march'd towards them, which they 
perceiveing, went off in a great haste; they were the Glasgow 
and othere militia commanded by the Earl of Hume. There was 
two regiments of foot (Barrels and anothere that made such a 
noise afterward for their gallant behaviour as it was call'd) and 
some dragoons in the hollow upon G. Hallys right which was 
not seen by the P. people, and, tho they heard the fireing did not 
know the fate of those on the top of the hill, was marching up 
the hill, which put a stop a litle to the pursuite, which C. Kerr 
seeing orderd Lord J. Drummond's regiment the French piquets 
(the French was a corps of reserve) and the P. guards to march 
to the brow of the hill, which those below seeing, stop'd short 
and by the favour of the night and a heavy rain they nmrchd 
off undisturb'd; and what contributed much to their goeing off 
in that manner was their being so near the toun (Falkirk) that 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 471 

it was not thought proper to pursue them in the dark lest there 
shou'd be a body of men in the toun (to cover their retreat) where 
a few men wou'd have hinderd the Highlanders from entering 
that night, in which case they wou'd have been oblig'd to have 
lain in the fields wett as they were; however upon strick inquiry 
it was found that G. Hally had abandon'd both his camp (which 
they endeavourd to burn but the tents were so wett that they 
wou'd not burn) and the toun, upon which the P. took posses- 
sion of them, where Lord J. Drummond was shot through the 
arm by a soldier who made his escape afterwards. 

On entering the toun there was two regiments orderd to pur- 
sue the enemy, but such is an iregular army that there was not 
fifty men to be got together, every on puting himself under co- 
ver (tho' it was fair by that time) as fast as he cou'd, so that 
there was with deficulty as many men found as wou'd mount the 
necessary guards for the P. and their own safties, so that the 
enemy went off unmolested tho' they never stop'd till they came 
to Linlithgow (6 miles) and some to Edinburgh; by which their 
camp (all their tents standing) cannon and a great deal of bag- 
gage fell to the conquerour; this happen'd on the 17th of Ja- 
nuary 1746. 

Next morning reconnoitreing parties were sent out to observe 
their motions, and an inquiry made into the forces that was in 
toun, by which it was found that there was not 500 men, the rest 
haveing gone either from the field of batle the night before or 
early that morning to Stirling (where the Duke of Perth had 
been left to keep the garrison of the castle from sallying out to 
carry oft' the cannon and destroying the works) and othere places, 
where officers were sent after them to endeavour to stop them and 
if possible to prevaile with them to stay. When they enter'd 
Scotland from England they began to desert, and in order to pre- 
vent that, they were promis'd leave to goe home to see their 
friends, as they came near their own countries. Till they saw 



472 ACCOUNT OF 

what wou'd be the consequence of the batle they were prevaild 
upon for some days, but were always goeing off. 

The P. stay'd two days at Falkirk and then return'd to Ban- 
nockburn leaving Lord George Murray to observe the motions 
of the enemy. Some days thereafter there was a general review 
at Falkirk where the men made a good appearence, tho' far short 
of the numbers they were before the batle. 

Glengarrie's second son, who had gone home from Edinburgh 
when the P. went to England, to raise more men, had return'd 
and was accidentily shot by a man that was cleaning his piece. 
Lord George continued there till the Duke of Cumberland (who 
came post from London to Edinburgh to take the command of 
the army and whose presence gave great life to their affairs) have- 
ing assembled all his troops togethere (there was some new re- 
giments had join'd by that lime) march'd from Edinburgh to 
Linlithgow and places adjacent for the conveniency of quarters, 
which when Lord George heard he sent to acquent the P. and 
the impossability of his mantaining his ground with the few men 
he had. Locheill and others of the clans that was at Falkirk had 
join'd before in a representation to the P. setting furth the impos- 
sability of their staying there, as the most of their men had left 
them. The Duke's advancing made Lord George retire towards 
Stirling to joine the P. and patrols was orderd that night every 
where where they thought the enemy cou'd pass, but these pa- 
trols (like young soldiers not concidering that their own safty 
and otheres depended upon their vigilence) returnd to the P. quar- 
ters, where C. Kerr seeing their commanders, ask'd the reason of 
it. The reasons not being satisfactory, he acquented Lord George 
Murray with it, who orderd them out again and told them to be 
very attentive, for C. Kerr wou'd be with them at Larbour (within 
a mile of Falkirk the principal post and nearest the enemy) by 
three o'clock in the morning, which he accordingly was and 
found them all very much on their guard, where he stayd till day- 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 473 

light, but neither seeing nor hearing any thing of the enemy, he 
returnd to make his report, but to his great surprize he found 
that the P. had marchd sooner than what was designd. 

It had been resolved the night before to march next morning 
(the 1st of February) by eight o'clock; the place appointed for 
the army to assemble was upon the croft near St. Ninians (alias 
St. Ringin's) church (which was blown up that morning by ac- 
cident and not designe as was said) and Lord George Murray was 
to be early that morning at old Green Yards to distribute the 
cloath &c. that had been got at Glasgow for the use of the army, 
(Highlanders) where he went, but few comeing to receive them, 
he sent to know the reason of it, which when told surpriz'd him 
very much, and as carts could not be found to carry off what 
was not given out, every man took what he had a mind, and the 
rest was left to those that came next, by which they were litle 
the better of what they got at Glasgow. 

C. Kerr upon his return from Larbour finding that they were 
marchd, went to Green Yards where he found Lord George and 
told him that the patrols had been very vigilent and that there 
was not one of the enemy come to Falkirk (some of the patrols 
had gone that lenth) that night nor none of them appearing in 
the plains about it, and at the same time express'd his surprize 
at his finding the P. marchd before his return, for which he 
(Lord George) cou'd give no reason, but follow'd them. When 
Lord George came up with the rear he stop'd some of them near 
the firs on a riseing ground near St. Ninians to keep in the gar- 
rison of Stirling Castle and give time to any straglers that might 
be left behind to come up, and C. Kerr went forward to acquent 
the P. with what had past at Larbour and othere places where 
the patrols were, and in his way he found Lord John Drummonds 
regiment in the center, which had been the night before orderd 
to remain in Stirling (where the cannon was naild as there was 
no horses to carry them off) till every thing that was in the toun 

VOL. II. 3 P 



474 ACCOUNT OP 

(store &c.) was carried off, and that all the people that belongd 
to the army were out of it, and to bring up the rear. C. Kerr 
was told that they had Mr. OSulivans orders to march precisely 
at six o'clock that morning, by which Lady Ogilvie was very 
near taken prisoner, but her equipage was and a great many 
of the men that knew nothing of the suden march. When he 
came to the P. he told him that there was none of the enemy ap- 
pearing when he left Larbour and that the patrols were still there 
and was not to leave that till further orders, upon which two aid 
de camps was orderd (the one to Larbour and the othere to the 
bights above the Torwood) to bring them off, which they did, 
but Lord George for fear of mistakes orderd C. Kerr likeways 
who in his way mett them. The P. continued his march to the 
foord of the Frews where he passt with the army, which went to 
Dumblaine, and the P. to Drummond Castle that night. The 
roads being very bad, some cannon and carriages was left by the 
way for want of horses to take them forward; the next morning 
the army marchd to Grief and wasjoind on the march by the pri- 
soners that was taken at Falkirk, that had been at Down for some 
days, and their guard. Some of the officers, notwithstanding the 
civilities that was shown them, tho they had given their word of 
honour both by word and by writt that they shoud not benefite of 
any indulgence, made their escape on the march. The P. lay 
that night at Fairnton where there was a council held, and as 
they were to march to Inverness and there was no possability of 
keeping together, especially the horse, it was resolved that the 
P. and the clans shou'd goe by Wad's road and Lord George 
Murray by the coastside with the horse and the rest of the foot. 
Lord George went to Perth where he stay'd a day to order every 
thing for the march, but as there was no possability of geting 
horses to carry off' the cannon that was taken out of the Hazard 
sloop, that had been mounted at a conciderable expence, they 
were nail'd, and he marchd for Inverness where he was to meet 

.} .JO'V 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S OPERATIONS. 475 

the P. the 16th, but the weather proved so very bad that the P. 
had got there before him and had made himself master of the 
toun and castle. 

The Hazard sloop of war had been stationd on that coast, to 
hinder any supplys comeing from France whilst the P. was in 
England, and at the request of some of the inhabitants of Mon- 
trose (or Montross) went into that harbour to protect the toun 
and beat some of Lord Ogilvies men, that was there, out of it, 
but as she cou'd not goe out again but when the wind and tide 
served, Captain Ferrier with the assistenceof some of the French 
officers (who were just arrived) rais'd a battery on the shore and 
mounted four pieces of smale cannon he had taken out of a ship 
in that harbour, with which they fired upon her and made her 
surrender. She had been sent to France and was retaken on her 
return. 

It was propos'd to the P. when he left Blair Castle, to burn it, 
that it might not be a garrison to the enemy when he was gone 
(but he absolutly refus'd it) which if he had it wou'd have saved 
him a great deal of trouble it gave him afterwards, but in his way 
he took the barracks at Ruthvin of Badenoch and burnd them. 

N. B. From the time the P. landed in Scotland he march'd the 
most of the way to Derby and back to Inverness on foot at the 
head of his men, seldome or never mounted on horseback/ even 
to cross waters. 



3P2 



In .-..; . 









J , 



JOURNALL AND MEMOIRS. 



JOURNALL AND MEMOIRS 

OF 

. , , , C * * * Cjcpetittion into &cotlatto $ c, 

1745-6. 
By a Highland Officer in his Army. 



L/PON the i8th of July 1745 His R. H. arived in the harbour 
of Lochnanuagh in Arisaig (a corner of Clanronald's country 
on the western coast of Scotland) on board a French ship of 30 
guns, commanded by Captain Walsh. He was accompanied 
only by the Duke of Athole, Sir Thomas Sheridan, Sir John 
M c Donald, Sir Francis Strictland, Collonel O'Sulivan, Mr. Kelly, 
Mr. Buchanan, Mr. Angus M c Donald brother to Kinlochmoy- 
dart, together with Mr. Michael and three other servants. This 
was all the foreign force in ane enterprise the most hazardous 
and resolute that the history of any person or country can aford. 
July 19th ane express was dispatch'd for young Clanronald, 
and next day, being the 20th, Clanronald, Alexander M c Donald 
of Glenaladale, ^Eneas M c Donald of Dalily, and I, came to 
Forsy, a small village opposite to the road where the Prince's 
vessel lay. We called for the ships boat and were immediatly 
carryed on board, and our hearts were overjoyed to find ourselves 
go near our long wished for P ce. We found a large tent erected 
with poles on the ships deck covered and well furnished with 



480 JOURNAL OP 

riety of wines and spirits. As we enter'd this pavilion we were 
most chearfully welcom'd by the Duke of Athole to whom some 
of us had been known in the year 1715. While the Duke was 
talking with us, Clanronald was a-missing and had, as we un- 
derstood, been called into the P ce's cabin, nor did we look 
for the honour of seeing His R. H. at least for that night. After 
being 3 hours with the P., Clanronald returned to us, and in 
about half ane hour after there entered the tent a tall youth of a 
most agreeable aspect in a plain black coat with a plain shirt 
not very clean and a cambrick stock fixed with a plain silver 
buckle, a fair round wig out of the buckle, a plain hatt with a 
canvas string haveing one end fixed to one of his coat buttons ; 
lie had black stockins and brass buckles in his shoes ; at his first 
appearance I found my heart swell to my very throat. We were 
immediatly told by one Obrian a churchman that this youth was 
also ane English clergyman who had long been possess'd with a 
desire to see and converse with Highlanders. *) > 

When this youth entered, Obrian forbid any of those who 
were sitting to rise ; he saluted none of us, and we only made a 
low bow at a distance. I chanced to be one of those who were 
standing when he came in, and he took his seat near me but im- 
mediatly started up again and caused me sitt down by him upon 
a chest. I at this time taking him to be only a passenger or 
some clergyman, presumed to speak to him with too much fa- 
miliarity yet still retained some suspicion he might be one of 
more note than he was said to be. He asked me if I was not 
cold in that habite (viz. the highland garb) I answered I was so 
habituated to it that I should rather be so if I was to change my 
dress for any other. At this he laugh'd heartily and next en- 
quired how I lay with it at night, which I explaind to him ; he 
said that by wraping myself so closs in my plaid I would be un- 
prepared for any sudden defence in the case of a surprise. I 
answered that in such times of danger or during a war we had 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 491 

a different method of useing the plaid, that with one spring I 
could start to my feet with drawn sword and cock'd pistol in my 
hand without being in the least incumber'd with my bedcloaths. 
Severall such questions he put to me ; then rising quickly from 
his seat he calls for a dram, when the same person whisper'd 
me a second time, to pledge the stranger but not to drink to him, 
by which seasonable hint I was confirm'd in my suspicion who 
he was. Having taken a glass of wine in his hand he drank to 
us all round, and soon after left us. 

On the 19th, 20th and 21st His R. H. was in private with 
Sir Thomas Sheridan, the Duke of Athole, and Clanronald, and 
on the 22d, Clanronald and Allan M c Donald, younger brother 
.to Kinlochmoydart were sent to Sir Alexander M c Donald of Slate 
and the Laird of M c loed to induce them to join His R. H. ac- 
cording to duty and promise; Glenaladel, another gentleman 
and I being likewise sent to conveen Clanronald's men and to 
get some of the best of them for the P 's guard in the mean 
time, and others to be employd in unloading the ship of the arms 
and amunition. This was our whole business till Clanronald's 
return from the Isle of Sky, whose errand was in vain, those 
.gentlemen alledging that the P. comeing without some regular 
troops more arms and money, they were under no engagement 
to concurr in the enterprize. Donald M c Donald of Scotos came 
also on board as Glengaries representative, as likewise Cameron 
of Lochiel, M'Donald of Keppoch and M'Donald of Glenco, 
who having concerted measures with His R. H. in behalf of 
their king and country, repaired immediatly to their respective 
homes with orders to conveen all their followers and appoint 
them to randevouse the of next month, being August, at 
Glenfinnin jn Moydart where His R. H. with Clanronalds regi- 
ment would join them and then display the royal standart. 
These chieftains carried with them some arms and amunition for 
the use of such of their people as wanted. 

VOL. H. 3 Q 



483 JOURNAL OF 

Captain Walsh now preparing to return for France took his 
leave of the P. and weighed anchor on the 25th of July, which 
day His R. H., the Duke of Athole, Clanronalcl &c. came on 
shore and landed at the little village of Borradel in the country 
of Arisaig belonging to Clanronald, and here H. R. H. first sett 
foot on Scotish ground excepting one night that he tarried in the 
house of Angus M'Donald at a place called Eriskay in the isle 
of Wist, whither letters were brought to him by Boystil from 
Sir Alexander M c Donald and the Laird of M c Leod discouraging 
his attempt at this time. So all may judge how hazardous ane 
enterprize we (i. e. Clanronald's people) were now engaged in, 
being for some time quite alone, who notwithstanding resolved 
to follow our P. most chearfully and risque our fate with him. 
We there did our best to give him a most hearty welcome to our 
country, the P. and all his company with a guard of about 100 
men being all entertaind in the house &c. of Angus M'Donald 
of Borradel in Arisaig in as hospitable a manner as the place 
could aford. H. R. H. being seated in a proper place had a full 
view of all our company, the whole nighbourhood without di- 
stinction of age or sex crouding in upon us to see the P. After 
we had all eaten plentifully and drunk chearfully, H. R. H. 
drunk the grace drink in English which most of us understood ; 
when it came to my turn I presumed to distinguish myself by 
saying audibly in Erse (or highland language) Deochs laint-an 
Reogh ; H. R. H. understanding that I had drunk the Kings 
health made me speak the words again in Erse and said he could 
drink the Kings health likewise in that language, repeating my 
words ; and the company mentioning my skill in the highland 
language, H. R. H. said I should be his master for that language, 
and so was made to ask the healths of the P. and D. 

Having staid three or four days in Borradel, during which 
time messages were still comeing and going betwixt the P., 
Lochiel, Glengary, and Keppoch &c. H. R. H. then sett out for 

-'Jl -10V " 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-(j. 483 

the town of Kinlochmoyclart in Moydart, seven miles from Bor- 
radel, by the head of Lochnanuagh and Lochailort, which way 
Clanronalds regiment marched closs by the shoar, the P. with 
his artilary and bagadge going by sea, as being the shortest 
passage, of about four miles. 

A surmise of the Ps landing being now whisperd abroad, 
and the Government haveing notice therof, a strong detachment 
of f<5ur companys were ordered to Fortwilliam to reinforse the 
garisoh there; and Glengary and Keppochs people, who were 
then assembling, judged it expedient to prevent the soldiers from 
passing through their country. Accordingly, Keppoch (with 
about 40 men) intercepted them at the High bridge and obliclged 
them to retreat back through Latterfinlay ; but Keppoch know- 
ing their superiority in numbers, and waiting for the advantage 
of the ground, did not attack them clossly till they enterd a thick 
wood at the head of Lochlochy, called Longanachdrom, where 
they attacked and surrounded them, some of Glengaries people, 
also from the village of Longanachdrom, comeing in to support 
Keppoch. A few soldiers were wounded ; five or six killed, with 
the loss of 2 men of the Highlanders ; and these four companys 
were all taken prisoners and sent to His R. H. at Glenfinin iu 
Moydart. 

As the P. was setting out for Glenfinin to meet his freinds ac- 
cording to appointment, I was detatched to Ardnamurchan to re- 
cruit, and soon returned with 50 cliver fellows who pleased the 
P., and upon review, His H. was pleased to honour me with the 
command of them, and told me I was the first officer he had made 
in Scotland; which compliment encouraged my vanity not a 
little, and with our freinds vowed to the Almighty we would live 
and die with our noble P. though all Britain should forsake him 
but our little regiment alone. 

The P. having set out from Kinlochmoydart on the 7th, on the 
8th he stayed at Alexander M c Donalds of Glenaladals house the 



484 JOURNAL OF 

first night, where Captain Swetnam, an officer in Guises regi- 
ment, having- been taken at , was brought in prisoner 
by Keppochs M c Donalds. 

The P. set out from Glenaladals house about 6 a clock in the 
morning and arrived at Glenfinin about eleven fornoon, being 
met at his landing by Mr. M c Donald of Morror &c. with 150 
men ; about 2 a clock afternoon Lochiel appeared at the head of 
700 men, and was soon after followed by Keppoch with about 
300 men ; upon which the P. immediatly causd erect the royall 
standart and proclaimed the K. his father. That night our 
Uttle army was encamped and provisions provided for them, we 
were now about 1200 men under the command of Clanronald, 
Lochiel and Keppoch ; Colonel OSulivan being appointed ad- 
jutant general and quarter master of the army. 

Notice being given that Sir John Cope with the Governments 
troops was marching from Stirling, after 3 nights stay at Glen- 
finin H. R. H. set out upon the 12th with Lochiels and Keppochs 
regiments only, to encamp that night at Fassfarran in Lochaber, 
from whence he marched next morning to Moy, Clanronalds 
regiment being ordered to follow with the baggage and pri- 
soners, from the head of Lochseal to the camp at Moy, where 
we joined them, after a great deal of fatigue, on the 1 5th, from 
whence we marched next morning in order to encamp at Latter- 
finlay. But H. R. H. having inteligence that Sir John (with 
about 3000 men) was got the length of Dalquiny in Badenoch, 
he marched on, under night, with Clanronald and Keppochs bat- 
talions till he came to the Castle of Invergarie, from whence he 
marched next day to Obertaive in Glengarie where Lochiel came 
up with us. Here Stewart of Ardshiel joind the P. with 200 of 
the Apin men ; also did the MDonalds of Glengarie, being 60O 
good men conducted by M c Donald of Lochgarie. 

The P. being fully resolved to stop the further progres of the 
Governments troops, a council of war was held at Obertaive, where 

> & 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 485 

it was chearfully resolved to take possession of the defiles of the 
mountain Corryarag, between Glengary and Badenoch, before 
General Cop should reach them. Accordingly His R. H. sellout 
August 27 at 4 morning from Oberhallader in Glengary, our re- 
giment in the van, next Glengaries, Keppochs and Ardsheals 
followed in order, and Lochiels in the rear. We were all in good 
spirits and resolute to meet the enemy in the muir, judgeing they 
were to hold their course over the hill of Corryarag towards Fort- 
agustus, being the more provoked that Cope was comeing in a 
hostile manner into our country. We had just passed the hill 
when a gentleman of the name of M c Pharson came to give His 
R. H. notice that Sir John Cope had the day before alterd his 
rout from Corryarag, and turning northward had marched to 
Riven in Badenoch, haveing to deceive us sent part of his bag- 
gage with 2 companys of foot and the camp colours four miles 
further in the road to Fortagustus as if he was to follow them 
with his whole army. Many of the Highlanders vext at Cops 
escape proposed that a strong detatchment might be allowed to 
follow them, but this was not thought proper. The P. notwith- 
standing of this intelligence continued his march untill he reached 
Garvamore in Badenoch, where a councill of war was held with 
the heads of the clans, Sir Thomas Sheridan, Secretary Murray 
&c. (which last had now joind the P.) when it was resolved to 
march to the south of Scotland; and accordingly we reached 
Dalquiny. Next day Dr. Cameron, Lochiels brother, and Donald 
M c Donald of Lochgarie were sent with 100 men to surprise the 
barracks of Riven, but haveing nothing but their small arms they 
were repulsed with the loss only of 2 men killed and 2 wounded; 
however they fell upon a method to take M c Pharson ot Cluny 
prisoner (who commanded a company in the Governments ser- 
vice) and brought him to the camp at Dalwhiny, from whence 
he was dismist upon his promising to raise his men as soon as 
possible for the P's service. 



486 JOURNAL OF 

Next day our army marched as far as Dalnaccardoch in Athol^ 
and the day following we reached the Castle of Blair, a seat of 
the Duke of A thole, where we were well received and stayed 
three days. Here we were joined by Lord Nairn, his brother, 
and severall other gentlemen from Perthshire. From Blair we 
marched for Dunkelld, and next day came to Perth whither 
Lochiel, Lord Nairns brother &c. were sent 2 days before to pro- 
claim the P. R., and Keppoch was dispatched at the same time 
to Dundee in order to sease some arms, amunition, publick mo- 
ney &c. there. 

After our arrivall at Perth the army was reviewed, and Clan- 
ronald with 150 men were sent to second Keppochs enterprise at 
Dundee, who by wrong information had been told by some gen- 
tlemen from that town that he could not effectual any thing there 
without a greater force. We sett out from Perth about midnight 
and marched so quick that we reached Dundee by daybreak. 
Being masters of the town we seized 2 vessalls with arms and 
amunition which we sent further up the river Tay towards 
Perth ; we likewise took up some publick money here, liberated 
some prisoners and proclaimd the P. R g t, and upon Mon- 
day thereafter we marchd back to Perth. 

His R. H. left Perth on Wednesday the llth of September, 
when we marched near 20 miles and came to Dumblane where 
our army rested the 12th and encamped that night a mile with- 
out the town between Dumblane and Stirling. 

It was in this neighbourhood that many of our fathers and se- 
veralls of us now with the P. fought for the same cause just thirty 
years ago at the battle of Sherriffinuir. 

On the 13th we marched from Dumblane through Down, and 
crossed the water of Teath at the bridge there. The P. sloped 

at a gentlemans house near Down, of the name of E n, and 

drunk a glass of wine on horseback, where the ladys &c. of the 
country were assembled tp see him. We passed the river Forth 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 487 

that day at the ford of Frew, about 6 miles above Stirling, ex- 
pecting to have been opposed there by Colonell Gardners dra- 
goons who encamped in the park of Stirling and who we heard 
had threatned to cut us to pieces if we attempted to cross the 
water. The dragoons however upon our approach galloped 
away in a great hurry and lay that night at Falkirk. 

The P. in crossing Forth may be said to have passed the Ru- 
bicon ; he had now no rough ground for a retreat in case of any 
disaster, and being entered into the low country must fairly meet 
his fate. He and his little army halted, soon after passing Forth, 
and dined at the house of Leckie belonging to a gentleman of 
the name of Moir who had the night before been seized in his 
bed by a party of dragoons and carried prisoner to Stirling Cas- 
tle, upon intelligence that he was preparing to receive and in- 
tertain the P. and his followers, which indeed we were in a most 
hospitable manner, as well as many other of our freinds who fol- 
lowed soon after. 

This night we lay at Touch, and next day, being the 14th, we 
marched to Falkirk. The town of Stirling, abandoned by the dra- 
goons, was ready to receive us, tho' we did not enter; provisions 
being demanded, were soon provided for us by order of the majes- 
trates. As we passed Stirling, severall cannon were fired at us 
from the castle. At Falkirk we understood that Colonel Gardner 
with his dragoons had retreated east six miles further to Lithgow, 
and the P. ordered a detatchment of 500 men to advance before the 
main body and attack the dragoons in their camp ; but Gardner, 
dreading the worst, marchd off at 7 o'clock in the evening and 
encamped at Kirkliston-water 6 miles west of Edinburgh. We 
encampd 3 miles to the east of Linlithgow, and the 16th marched 
towards Corstorphine whither Gardner still retired, where we 
heard he was joind by Hamiltons dragoons who had been en- 
camped in Leith links, and being reinforsed by the Edinburgh 
city guard and some volun tiers, were resolved to wait and re- 



488 .&. JOURNAL OP 

ceive us at Corstorphine ; but their picket, upon the approach of 
our advanced guard, retreated to their main body and altogether 
soon fled by the north side of Edinburgh to Leith and Musle- 
bnrgh, the foot returning to the town. 

We encamped that night at Grays milns 2 miles S. west of the 
city, where some of the majestrates of Edinburgh waited on the 
P. to desire time to draw up a capitulation. H. R. H's answer 
was that he thought the K's (viz. his fathers) declaration and his 
own manifesto were sufficient terms of capitulation for all His 
M t s subjects to accept of with joy, and that they had no 
other to expect. To consider of which he gave them 4 hours, 
and required a positive answer by 2 a clock in the morning ; 
but no answer comeing, and only a further delay asked, His R. 
H. ordered a detachment of 900 men under cloud of night to 
storm the town, and accordingly, Lochiel, Keppoch and Ardshiel 
with some of the best armed of their severall commands, together 
with Mr. OSulivan, silently marched up to the city gate at the 
Netherbow, and about break of day boldly forced their way, 
there being no resistance made by the small guard at the port, 
so there was no blood shed. Our people with drawn sword and 
target, with a hideous yell and their particular manner, of making 
ane attack (they not knowing what resistance they might meet 
with in the town) marched quickly up street, no one leaving 
their rank or order, and forced their way into the city guard- 
house and took possession. The main body drew up in the Par- 
liament closs, and guards w r ere immediatly placed at every gate 
of the city ; and the inhabitants cannot in justice but acknow- 
ledge that the behaviour of our Highlanders was civil and inno- 
cent beyond what even their best freinds could have expected. 
His R. H. on Tuesday forenoon, being the' 1 7th of September, 
inarched the rest of his little army from Grays milns through the 
J's park and there encamping came himself to the royal palace 
at the Abby of Hollyrood-house amidst a vast croud of spectators 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 48? 

who from town and country flocked together to see this uncom- 
mon sight, expressing their surprize and joy together by loud and 
frequent huzzas ; indeed the whole scene, as I have been told by 
many, was rather like a dream, so quick and amazing seemed the 
change, tho no doubt wise people saw well enough we had much 
to do still. 

After two days stay in Edinburgh for our refreshment, and 
proclamation made over the Cross, of the P's regency, and some 
necessarys provided, we were order'd to encamp at Dudingston 
about a mile S. east from Edinburgh, His R. H. remaining all 
night in the Abby with his guards, and visiting and reviewing 
us every day, till Friday morning the P. having learned that 
General Cope was landed at Dunbar with the addition of some 
Highland companys raised by the Government, H. R. H. marched 
us from the field at Dudingston early in the morning, and about 
three in the afternoon we were in sight of the enemy, who had 
taken up their ground on the plain near the town of Preston pans 
betwixt Colonel Gardners house and P. Seton. We lay in sight 
of them till the evening when our people grew very impatient to 
be engadged, but with difficulty being restrained by authority, 
both arinys lay upon their arms all night. The enemy were about 
4000, drawn up on the field on the east of Preston, having that 
village on their right, a broad and deep ditch on their front, a 
small morass on their left, and the Firth of Forth on their rear, 
so that it was impossible to attack them in front but at the greatest 
risk. Their foot in the center were the regiments of Murray and 
Lascelles, 5 companys of Lees's, 4 companys of Guise's, 3 com- 
panys of Lord Loudens Highland regiment, and a number of re- 
cruits for regiments at home and abroad ; Hamiltons and Gard- 
ners dragoons forming the wings on the right and left. There 
were besides, volunteers, seceders &c. from Edinburgh, and gen- 
tlemen at the head of their tennents. General Cope had cannon 
and coehorns which were thrown off during the night, and large 

voj,. ii. 3 R 



4 90 JOURNAL O? 

fires were made round his whole camp. Our men keept quiet 
all night, not a word was heard. Saturday 21st of September 
about three in the morning we changed our ground and marched 
eastward, then turning north formed in 2 lines so as to prevent 
the enemys retreat through the east country, towards Hadding- 
toun on the one hand, or on the other their stealing a march 
upon us towards Edinburgh. The disposition being made, 
H. H. H. address'd his little army in these words " Follow me, 
Gentlemen ; by the assistance of God I will this day make 
you a free and happy people." We then marched chearfully 
on and engaged the enemy ; our attack being on the east side 
oblidged Cope to change his disposition. Our right wing was 
led on by the Duke of Perth as Leu tenant General and con- 
sisted of the regiments of Clanronald, Keppoch, Glengarie and 
Glenco under their severall cheifs; the left by Lord George 
Murray consisting of the batalions of Camerons commanded 
by Lochiel, the Stewarts by Ardshiel, their cheiftain Appin not 
being with us in this affair; one body of the M c Gregors with 
Glencairney, and the rest of the MGregors with the Duke 
of Perths men under Major James Drummond. The enemys 
artillary plaid furiously upon our left, especially on Lochiells 
battalions; their cannon also racked our right wing but did little 
execution. Their great guns were followed by a very regular 
fire of the dragoons on the right and left, and this again by closs 
platoons of all their infantry, which our men received with in- 
trepidity and an huzza, a thing most extraordinary in a militia 
army undisiplined and untryed, who upon this occasion keept up 
their fire till they were very near, being always sure that their one 
fire should do execution, which they having done, immediatly 
threw down their guns and drawing their broadswords rushed in 
upon them like a torrent and carried all before them. Our march 
up to the enemy till we came near was without pipe or drum, in 
the most profound silence till the attack was begun, when all our 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 491 

* 

instruments tongues and hands were at work. As we were about 
to engadge, M c Donald of Glenaladel, of Clanronalcls regiment, 
was orderd with a detached party of sixty chosen men double 
armed, to take possession of the enemys baggage at Preston as 
soon as he should perceive the main bodys engadged. The P. 
left his guard on the march to the attack, talking earnestly to the 
Duke of Perth and Clanronald and giveing his last orders and 
injunctions ; but returning to his guard, as I happend to pass 
near by him, he with a smile said to me in Erse, " Gres-ort, 
Gres-crt," that is, Make haste, make haste. As in our march to 
the attack, the right was oblidged to stop a little till the left should 
come up. At this time the enemys guards first perceived us, for 
\ve heard them call out " Who is there ? Who is there ? Cannons, 
cannons, get ready the cannons, cannoneers;" but our quick 
march and sudden and intrepid attack soon brought us into the 
midst of our enemys, where we soon put them to rout, the ge- 
neral and a few horse and officers escapeing with difficulty to 
Berwick, Major Cawfield with a few dragoons to Leith and Edin- 
burgh Castle. 

Now whatever notion or sentiments the low country people 
may entertain of bur Highlanders, this day there were many 
proofs to a diligent spectator amidst all the bloodshed (which at 
the first shock was unavoidable) of their humanity and mercy ; 
for^I can with the strictest truth and sincerity declare that I often 
heard our people call out to the soldiers if they wanted quarters, 
and we the officers exerted our utmost pains to protect the sol- 
diers from their first fury, when either through their stubomess 
or want of language they did not cry for quarters, and I observed 
some of our privat men run to P. Seton for ale and other li- 
quors to support the wounded. And as one proof for all, to my 
own particular observation, I saw a Highlander supporting a 
poor wounded soldier by the arms till he should ease nature, and 
afterwards carry him on his back into a house, and left him a 



492 JOURNAL OF 

t 

sixpence at parting. In all which we followed not only the dic- 
tates of humanity but the orders of our P. in all, like the true 
father of his country. 

In the afternoon having taken a short repast of Cope's provi- 
sions on the field of battle, His R. H. marched back to Musle- 
burgh at night, leaving the Laird of M c Lauchlen and some other 
gentlemen to take care of the wounded prisoners and the bag- 
gage and to get the dead buried. He himself lay at Pinky all 
night, a house belonging to the Marquess of Tweedale then se- 
cretary of state and who had signed the order for apprehending 
the P. with a premium of SOOOQL ; yet did not his army, tho' flush 'd 
with victory, committ any abuse, as neither was done in the least 
degree at Lord Stairs's house of Newliston in their way to Edin- 
burgh, tho' the Glenco men were of our number and could not 
have forgot the massacre of their clan soon after the Revolution 
and by whose order. 

The next day we inarched back to Edinburgh and took up 
our old camp at Dudingston. During the P's stay in Edinburgh 
waiting for a further reinforsement from the Highlands and pro- 
viding of other necessarys for our march into England, Clanro- 
nalds regiment was orderd down toNewhaven, a village west from 
Leith, upon the sea side, to prevent any correspondence betwixt 
the Governments two ships of war (viz 1 , the Fox, and Happy 
Jenet) and the Castle of Edinburgh, which last was likewise now 
blockaded; upon which, the guns from the Castle annoyed the 
inhabitants day and night till a deputation was sent from them 
to the P. earnestly begging he would consider their distressed con- 
dition; when he was graciously pleased to take off the blockade. 

During our stay at Edinburgh we were joined by Lord Pit- 
sligo and a good body of horse from the Mearns &c* as also by 
Lord Ogilvie and his regiment of foot from the Braes of Angus, 
and Glenbucket with the Gordons and Glenlivet men. The Duke 
of Athol also came up to us with a fresh body of his men. Some 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 493 

money likewise, with a small train of artilary and Mr. Grant 
the ingeneer from France, was come to the Abby of Hollyrood 
house. And now the P. having small hopes of the M c Donalds 
and M'Clonds from Sky &c. their cheafs being artfully detained 
by their great director Mr. Duncan Forbes of Culloden and pre- 
sident of the Session of Scotland, Lord Lovats Frazers also being 
very tardy, he resolved to lose no more time, but march into En- 
gland. Accordingly on the last day of October His R. H. left 
the Abby at Edinburgh, attended by his own guards of gentle- 
men, some of whom were accouterd and mounted as huzzars, and 
lodged at Pinky house. Next day, November first, he marched 
to Dalkeith, then took the road to Kelso for England with one 
part of his army, whilst the other division with the Duke of 
Athole &c. marched by Moftat, being appointed to rendevouze 
upon the English border, that is to say, the Duke of Athole with 
the low-country regiments the whole horse and the artillary went 
by Dumfrice. The P. sett out a day latter from Dalkeith with 
the six Highland regiments by Kelso, passed the river Tweed 
and came to Gedburgh, from whence crossing the border he was 
met by the other column within two miles of Carlisle. HisR. H. 
went airly on Munday the llth to Brampton, being seven miles 
on the road to Newcastle, in order to give General 1 Wade battle, 
but after waiting two days and understanding that Wade de- 
clined advancing toward us, the P. orderd the blocade of Car- 
lisle to be renewed, which was done by one half of the army 
whilst His R. H. with the other half remained at Brampton as the 
most convenient post to attack the enemy had they attempted 
the relief of Carlisle. The trenches were opened on the 13th at 
night under command of the Duke of Perth about a musket 
shot from the walls of the town about midway betwixt the En- 
glish and Scots gates, and thirteen cannon were brought up in 
order to play upon the town, but this was prevented by a capitu- 
lation signed by the Governour &c. on Thursday the fourteenth, 



491 JOURXAL, OF 

and His R. H. entered and took possession of the town and eastlfe 
on Friday morning, being the fifteenth. During both the block- 
ades of the town tliere was but one man killed and one wounded. 
The militia that served in Carlisle, and all the inhabitants of the 
city and neighbourhood can testify the exact disipline of our 
army who payed for every thing they got, and all were protected 
in their libertys and propertys. 

His R. H. continued in Carlisle till the twentieth, when leaving 
a sufficient garrison in the town, the van marched for Penrith; 
the twenty second, the van marched to Kendal and the main 
body to Penrith; the twenty third, the main body came to Ken- 
dal ; the twenty fourth the van marched to Lancaster, and the 
main body halted at Kendal; the twenty fifth, the van marched 
to Garstang, and the main body to Lancaster; the twenty sixth, 
the van passed Preston and quarterd at the village on the other 
side of the bridge, and the main body came to Preston. The 
twenty seventh, the whole army halted; the twenty-eighth, we 
marched to Wiggan and the villages near it; the twenty ninth 
all the army marched to Manchester and halted there. Here we 
beat up for recruits and began to form the Manchester regiment. 
December first, we marched to Macclesfield ; the second, the van 
marched to Congleton within nine miles of New Castle under 
line at which place the main body of the Duke of Cumberlands 
army lay. From Congleton Colonell K. was sent out with a de- 
tatchment towards New Castle for intelligence, and within three 
miles of that place he took Mr. Weir, their cheif spy, prisoner and 
brought him to Congleton, upon which the Duke of Cumberlands 
army retired to Leitchfield. The P. R 1 ., having intelligence of 
his retreat from New Castle under line, marched for Derby by 
Ashburn; December the third the van marched to Ashburn by 
Leek; the main body rested the second at Macclesfield and 
marched the third to Leek; the fourth the whole army went to 
Derby, where they stayed all the fifth, and in a council of war 



TUB EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 495 

held in His R. H's presence (dispatches of importance being re- 
ceived) it was resolved to return to Scotland. 

How far this was the properest course has been much can- 
vassd; some thinking the intelligence from Scotland of the great 
numbers conveend in arms or landed from France was ane im- 
position and that the P. with great unwillingness consented to 
a retreat. One thing is certain, never was our Highlanders 
in higher spirits notwithstanding their long and fatiguing 
march; they had indeed got good quarters and plenty of pro- 
visions in their march and were well paid; so that we judged we 
were able to fight double our numbers of any troops that could 
oppose us; and would to God we had pushed on tho r we had 
been all cutt to pieces, when we were in a condition for fighting 
and doing honour to our noble P. and the glorious cause we had 
taken in hand, rather than to have survived and seen that fatall 
day of Culloden when in want of provisions money and rest &c. 
we were oblidged to turn our backs and lose all our glory. 

Various, no doubt, are peoples sentiments as to the reasons or 
motives that enduced us to retreat, which I shall leave to be can- 
vassed at leisure. 

It being resolved to return to Scotland, the next day December 
sixth we marched to Ashburn on the seventh to Leek and on 
the eighth to Macclesfielcl ; the ninth the whole army marched 
to Manchester, the tenth to Wiggan, the eleventh to Preston 
where we stayed all the twelfth. On the thirteenth we marched 
to Lancaster and halted the fourteenth, which day a reconeitring 
party took prisoners two of the Duke of Cumberlands men called 
Rangers. While we were at Preston the Duke of Perth with an 
hundred horse was orderd to Scotland to bring up the French 
and others that were at Perth, but meeting witli some difficultys, 
returned back. On the fifteenth we came to Kendal; the six- 
teenth, the main body of our army was at Shap, but the rear 
guard were oblidged to stop at a farm four miles from Kendal, 



495 JOURNAL or 

by reason that a great many of the carriages and particularly 
the fourwheeld waggons, in which was part of the amunition, 
could not be got forward because of the steepness of the hill and 
badness of the road ; but small carts being got next day and the 
amunition shifted from the broken waggons, they came that 
night to Shap, the main body having gone to Penrith that day. 
The eighteenth the rearguard joind the main body at Penrith in 
the evening. They had observed severall partys of the enemy, 
but upon the advance of our rear guard they always retired; 
once a considerable body of their light horse form'd upon the 
road in order to stop our advanceing any further, but upon some 
of the Highlanders throwing down their plaids and running up 
to attack them, they retired, one of them only being killed. After 
the baggage was sent on to Penrith a battalion of our foot and 
some horse went through Lord Lansdales parks of Lowdar, 
thinking to find some of the enemys light horse about the house, 
as he was Lord Leutenant of the county ; accordingly some of 
them were seen at a distance, but rode off on sight of the High- 
landers. Some shots were fired after them, and at the same time 
some partys of our army scouring the parks took a running foot- 
man of the Duke of Cumberland prisoner and another person 
cloathed in green who appeard to be an officer, who informed 
that the Duke of Cumberland was within a mile with about 4000 
horse and dragoons besides light horse and militia; upon which 
Lord George Murray (who always commanded the rear guard) 
with four battallions, viz 1 . Glengarys, Cluny-M c Pharsons, the 
Athole and Appin people took possession of a village called Clif- 
ton, being a mile from Lord Lansdale's house upon the highway 
to and about two miles short of Penrith whither our main body 
was advanced. By that time the enemy had formed upon ane 
open muir faceing Clifton and within half cannon shot, where 
they continued for a considerable time; at last about ane hour 
after sunsett they dismounted severall of their dragoons who came 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 497 

to the bottom of the muir and lined the hedges and ditches that 
were next to it. Here was a pretty smart fire on both sides for 
about half ane hour, but at last the fire of the dragoons increas- 
ing, a battalion of Highlanders was sent doun to attack them 
sword in hand, with orders to drive them from their posts, but 
not to advance upon the muir; accordingly the Highlanders 
made their attack with great spirit and keenness, and after pass- 
ing two hedges drove the dismounted dragoons from the third 
and then retired, as they were ordered, to their former posts; 
only, twelve of our Highlanders in their great eagerness passed 
the bottom of the ditch and ran up the muir, which were all that 
were amissing after the action. How many of the dragoons were 
killed and wounded is uncertain; but by severall circumstances, 
such as the number of broadswords taken from the dragoons and 
the report of the wounded dressed at Penrith next day, they could 
not be fewer than a hundred. It is to be observed that at the 
beginning of this affair the M c Donalds of Glengarie having the 
guard of the artillary, when they came to the bridge of Clifton 
they sent notice to the P. at Penrith that the Duke of Cumber- 
lands whole body of horse was very near and would probably 
cutt them all off if not timely relieved, upon which the P. orderd 
back Clunys regiment of M c Phersons together with the Athole 
brigade and the Stewarts of Appin. Cluny's men were those 
cheifly engadged who after a fire broke in upon them with their 
swords. The Glengarie M c Donalds, who were placed behind a 
stone park-dike, continued to gall the enemy's Hank with their 
fire since they could not get at them with their swords, while the 
Athole and Appin men were not so clossly engadged. Our men 
would have done more execution on the enemy, had not night 
prevented them; and learning that they might beoverpoured by 
the greatly supperior number of the enemy who would be aug- 
mented by more horse from Wade and Ligonier, they made now 
a quick but orderly retreat and joind the P. at Penrith, and it 

VOL. II. 3 S 



98 JOURNAL, OF 

was not judged proper to engadge their whole force till we were 
reinforced by our army from Perth. Clanronald and Keppociis 
regiments were orderd to march back to Clifton bridge to amuse 
the people of Penrith with a belief that we were all to march 
back to fight the Duke of Cumberland, while our main body 
marched on from Penrith to Carlisle late at night, and our two 
regiments viz 1 . Clanronald and Keppochs marched quickly after 
them and arrived all safe at Carlyle on the 19th in the morning. 
This was one of the darkest nights I ever saw, yet did His R. H. 
walk it on foot and most part of the way without a Ian thorn, yet 
never stumbled, which many of us Highlanders did often. 

At Carlyle it was confirmed that Lord John Drummond was 
landed in the north of Scotland with some hundreds of pickets 
some money and arms &c. from France, who if he had marched 
up to us with all his force as he was ordered we might well have 
hoped for success and made our enemy fly befor us. On the 
twentieth December the P. having left a garrison in Carlile and 
particularly the English Manchester regiment, we sett out and 
passd the water of Esk about three afternoon. All this time the 
enemy never appeared, what they met with at Penrith having 
given them some disgusl. That night we left Carlyle we marched 
in two columns, one of which quarterd with His R. H. at Annan, 
the other at Ecclesfechan. It is certain (says Lord George Mur- 
ray in his journal) that by all accidents, such as death by sick- 
ness (of which it is believed there was more in one day in Gene- 
ral Wa e's army than were in six weeks in His R. Hs) and peo- 
ple which straggled to plunder (which notwithstanding all the 
officers were able to do could not be entirely prevented) and were 
not heard of again, His R. H. did not lose forty men in the whole 
expedition, including the twelve at Penrith; upon the whole 
(continues he) never was a march undertaken with more chear- 
fullness and executed with greater vigour and resolution, which 
(next to the visible protection of Almighty God) was owing to 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 499 

the example shown by His R. H. who always marched on foot 
at the head of his men. 

As soon as we pass'd the river Esk Lord George Murray with 
the low countrymen sett out before for Glasgow; on the twenty 
first we marched from Annan to Dumfrice, the twenty second to 
Drumlinrig, the twenty fourth to Douglas Castle, and on the 
twenty fifth to Hamilton. His R. H. staid one day at the palace 
of Duke Hamilton, and hunted. On the twenty seventh we 
marched for Glasgow where we staid near a week and laid a 
new cess upon the town who had taken arms against the P. while 
he was in England. On the sixth of January we marched from 
Glasgow to Cumbernauld and from thence to Falkirk. Next day 
orders were sent to the army at Perth to join us and with the 
artillary to invest Stirling Castle. After staying about a week, 
four of our six Highland regiments which were in England were 
ordered to march to Linlithgow under night, both to levy the 
publick money and carry oft the provisions which had been or- 
dered to be provided for the English army now conveend about 
Edinburgh under the command of General Hawly who was ad- 
van ceing towards us. Now the P. was joind by Lord John 
Drummond with the pickets of the Irish bragade from France, 
and Lord Lewis Gordon who had formerly joind the P. at Edin- 
burgh and was sent north, before his R. H. inarched into En- 
gland, to raise more men in his brother the Duke of Gordons 
lands. He had also defeated some hundreds of the M c Loads and 
Grants under the command of the Laird of M c Load and Cul- 
cairns &c, at Inverury near Aberdeen. This happend while the 
P. was in England. Here also we were joined by the Master of 
Lovat (Lord Lovats eldest son) with his Frazers, Glengyle with 
the reinforcement of M c Gregors, and Inverallahy with the Far- 
quarsons. The Duke of Perth commanded the seige of Stirling 
Castle, the Ps headquarters being at Bannockburn near Falkirk. 

After accomplishing our business at Linlithgow and taking 



500 JOURNAL. OP 

some prisoners we were orderd to march about half a mile east 
from the town of Lithgow on the road towards Edinburgh in or- 
der to cutt offGeneralHawlys advance guard. After drawing up 
in a plain there, a party of about thirty horse were sent out to re- 
connoitre both the ground and the enemy, and in less than an hour 
they returned to us and told they could descry no enemy near us, 
either horse or foot, upon which we marched back to Linlithgow 
and had not been there half an hour when we were alarmed with 
the notice that the enemys whole army was upon us. It was 
their first column under Generall Husk just entering the east gate 
of the town of Linlithgow. Upon this, considering our small 
numbers, we thought fitt to march off as quick as possible, which 
we did in pretty good order and joined our army at Falkirk. We 
all marched next day westward to Bannockburn, where the head 
quarters were. Generall Hawley (who had been joined by the 
Argyleshire Highlanders to the number of about twelve hundred 
under Generall Campbell) with the Governments troops encamped 

a little northwest from the toun of Falkirk. The P. finding Ge- 
ts 

neral Hawley did not move from his camp at Falkirk to attack 
him, held a councill of war, January the seventeenth, about mid- 
day, wherein it was resolved to march and attack Hawley. Ac- 
cordingly we sett out in two columns, and under the cover of the 
Tor wood passed the water of Carron at Dunipace, moveing on 
very quickly to gain the hill above and lying on the south west 
of Falkirk. Our two columns keept at ane equall distance of 
about two hundred paces till we came in sight of the enemy about 
a mile and a half distant from us. At the same time that we be- 
gan our march Lord John Drummond with most of the horse 
had gone to reconoitre the enemy and made a movement as if 
he intended' to march by the high way through the Tor wood 
closs up to them, and this might occasion what some accounts tell 
us, of General Hawlays perceiving a body of the Highlanders in 
the Tor wood, took this appearance to be our whole army, and 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 501 

finding they did not advance, allowed his troops to dyne in their 
camp. 

But to return to our main body ; whilst we were making up 
towards the hill above Falkirk (as was said) the enemy at last 
perceived us and immediatly their three regiments of dragoons 
were orclerd up to gain the ground upon us and hinder our form- 
ing till their foot should form and their cannon be brought up 
the hill to support them. The P. seeing the intention of the enemy, 
ordered 1500 or 2000 of his Highlanders, led on by Lord George 
Murray and Lochiel, to advance and drive the dragoons from 
the eminence they had possessd, till the main body of our men 
should come up, and to form the right of our army. This attack 
upon the dragoons was very quick and regular ; as we came 
within pistolshot the dragoons made up to us at a full trot, think- 
ing to bear us down by their weight, and break us at once, and 
indeed being well mounted and accouterd they made a glorious 
show, sufficient to have struck other hearts than ours with a pan- 
nick. We received them however with a very smart fire, upon 
which they reeld and broke into several divisions, some falling 
back upon their own foot on the left, others flying out of the field, 
whilst one body of them fled off' to the right betwixt the front 
lines of both arrnys, which by this time were form'd. Our first 
line was composed of the Highland, and the second mostly of the 
Low country regiments. Keppoch had by consent the right of 
all, as Clanronald had at the battle of Preston pans. Next to 
Keppochs men towards the left stood Clanronalds, next in order 
the M'Donalds of Glengarie, the Frazers, the Camerons and the 
Stewarts of Appin. This right wing was commanded by Lord 
George Murray as Leutenant Generall. The left, consisting 
mostly of Low country men, was commanded by the Duke of 
Perth. The P. with his own guards and Fits James's horse from 
France posted himself immediatly behind the center of the foot, 
at about twenty yards distance, that he might have a necessary 



502 JOURNAL OF 

and commanding view of the whole, having Lord John Drum- 
mond with the Irish pickets on his left. As the enemys dragoons 
rode off to their right betwixt the lines, our men ran eagerly in 
pursuit of them, but were much surprised to find themselves stopt 
by our generalls and officers who with difficulty restrained them 
with their drawn swords and cocked pistols conjuring them to 
return to their ground or they would be undone. As the dra- 
goons in their flight betwixt the lines past by our left wing they 
could not forbear giveing them part of their fire likewise. Our 
left had not been fully formed when the attack begun on the 
right ; a considerable body of the enemys horse came up also to 
attack them but receiving part of the fire of our left they broke 
and run off; their infantry comeing in upon that side were op- 
posed by some of our battalions who receiving the enemys fire 
went in amongst them sword in hand and drove them down the 
hill with great impetuosity and slaughter, but not being in sight 
of our right (by reason of the uneaveness of the ground) they 
made a halt till such time as the two wings should join in the 
center and the second line come up. His R. II., whose attention 
was turned to all quarters, observing that our left wing was out- 
lined by the enemy, sent Brigadeer Stapleton with the pickets of 
the Irish Bragade and some other battalions from the second line, 
which extended our first line and recovered the disorder we were 
like to be put into. Then our whole army marched down to- 
wards the enemy who were retreating on all sides in great dis- 
order, but by reason of the uneaveness of the ground and night 
comeing on with a storm of wind and rain they could not over- 
take them, as they were positively ordered to keep their ranks. 
The enemy finding they could neither possess nor save their camp 
sett fire to their tents and retreated with great precipitation to- 
wards Linlithgow and were just got to the east end of the toun 
of Falkirk when Lord John Drummond entered it on that side, 
Lord George Murray in the middle, and Lochiel in the west end 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 503 

oflhetoun. We took most of their cannon, ammunition and 
baggage which they had not themselves destroyed. We reckond 
about seven hundred of the enemy taken prisoners and about six 
hundred men and between thirty or forty officers killed. We had 
not above forty men killed on our side, among- whom were two 
or three captains and some subaltern officers. His R. H's first 
care early next morning was to cause bury the dead, as well 
those of the enemy as our own people. Had not night come on 
and been very stormy and our men engadged in pillaging the 
enemys camp, our army might have got betwixt them and Lith- 
gow and would have entirely distroyed them, but they being in 
want of every thing they thought fitt to retire next day to Edin- 
burgh near twenty miles from the field of battle. Both our offi- 
cers and men behaved with the greatest bravery, and our order 
in marching and attacking were allowed to be far beyond ex- 
pectation in the judgement of officers who had been in the 
wars abroad. It must be acknowledged indeed that the Irish 
officers were of great use to us in going through the different 
posts and assisting in the severall dispositions that were made. 
Generall Hawlys army consisted of twelve regiments of foot, 
three of dragoons, twelve companies of Argylshire Highlanders 
xmder Colonel Campbell and a thousand volunteers and eight 
hundred Glasgow militia, in all about ten thousand men. 

An unlucky accident happend amongst us next day ; Colonell 
Enaeas M c Donald second son to Glengarie and who commanded 
the Glengarie men, a brave and good naturd youth, was un- 
happily shot by the accident of a Highlandmans cleaning his 
peice. This poor gentileman satisfyed of the unhappy fellows 
innocence, beggd with his dying breath that he might not suffer; 
but nothing could restrain the grief and fury of his people, and 
good luck it was that he was a MDonald (tho not of his OAvn 
tribe but of Keppochs) and after all they began to desert daily 
upon this accident, which had a bad effect upon others also and 



504 JOURNAL OF 

lessend our numbers considerably, so that when the Duke of 
Cumberland who (upon the news of their late desaster at Fal- 
kirk was ordered down to Scotland to take the command) was 
preparing to sett out from Edinburgh with the army with a re- 
inforcement of two regiments of foot and Cobams and Lord M. 
Kers dragoons, it was judged expedient by the P. and a council 
of war to repass the Forth. Colonel OSulivan haveing wrot to 
Lord John Drummond to leave the seige of Stirling and join us 
in the retreat, we accordingly passed the Forth February first 
at the Frew, carrying our wounded men and prisoners alongst. 
It was lucky for the Duke of Cumberlands character that the P. 
found it necessary to make his retreat upon his approach, which 
no doubt would greatly augment his glory amongst his freinds 
and followers whose vanguard under Brigadeer Mordaunt en- 
ter'd Stirling on the first February, on the which day we passed 
the Forth and went by Dnmblane to Crief. Here a council being- 
held, the army divided and inarched in two seperat corps, the P. 
himself with the clans by Taybridge the publick Highland road, 
the horse and Low country men by Perth and the coastside to 
Aberdeen, it being agreed that they should assemble again in the 
north of Inverness, this measure being necessary for the armys 
easier march and better subsistance. I observe that the London 
Gazete told the world at this time " that tho the rebells gave out 
that they were to join again and attack Lord Louden at Inver- 
ness that this was only to amuze the people, for that they were 
actually disbanded." The P. accordingly marched with the 
Highlanders to Blair of Athole and from thence to Ruthven of 
Badenoch where a party under the command of Glenbucket took 
and blew up the barracks there ; from thence we took the road 
to Inverness, and the P. lay at M c lntosh's house about miles 
from Inverness, and his men canton'd about in the neighbour- 
hood. Here he had almost been surprized by Lord Louden who 
marchd from Inverness with about two thousand men to oppose 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 505 

him. This alarm soon brought us together, and Lord Louden re- 
tiring, we pursued closs to Inverness and oblidged him to cross 
the water, and soon after made ourselves masters of the castle 
and garrison there commanded by Mr. Grant of Rothomurcus, 
a Major, with some Grants and M c Loads as independent compa- 
nys. Lord Louden with the President Forbes &c. in great hurry 
crossed the river Tyne at Inverness by the ferry of Kessack and 
got into Cromarty, which day being Tuesday the eighteenth of 
February we entered Inverness. As Lord Louden had carried 
all the boats to the other side it was necessary for us in order to 
come at him to go about by the head of Tyne through Toren- 
donel, about ten miles march, and accordingly Glengarys, Clan- 
ronalds, Ardsheals, Glengyles, and Barisdales battalions were 
ordered after them under the command of the Duke of Perth and 
Lord Cromarty. Those under Lord Loudens command were the 
M c Loads, Sir Alexander M c Donalds men, the Makays and Mon- 
roes and the Grants, about three thousand in all. Upon our 
aproach they took flight again and ferryed over Loch-sund to 
Sutherland. We encamped at Ferintosh to wait further orders, 
both arrnys keeping guard on the opposite banks of the Loch- 
sund. By the diligence of the Duke of Perth some boats were 
got together, and being happily favourd by a fog we passed over, 
but our enemys left their post in great consternation and fled five 
miles northward tow.ards Glen more were we were told they were 
to wait for us. We marched all night, the van led on by the 
Duke of Perth and the rear by Lord Cromarty, and surprized 
and took prisoners about sixty of them besides Major M c Kenzie, 
the Laird of Forsie and severall other gentlemen. We M c Donalds 
were much perplex'd in the event of ane ingagement how to di- 
stinguish ourselves from our bretheren and nighbours the M c Do- 
nalds of Sky, seeing we were both Highlanders and both wore 
heather in our bonnets, only our white cocades made some di- 
stinction. We understood as we advanced (by our scouts) that 

VOL. II. 3 T 



506 JOURNAL OF 

the enemy continued to retire ; we however still held on our pur- 
suit very quick, thinking to come up with them, and haveing 
marched twenty six miles encampd at the head of Lochshin. By 
our intelligence we found that the M c Loads and MDonalds were 
makeing for the shoar to get to their own Isle of Sky, upon which 
we begun our march back again to Inverness, Lord Cromarty 
and Barisdale &c. being left in the country to keep Lord Suther- 
land and Lord Raes people in order. 

As the P. came towards Inverness, it had been concerted to 
make an attack upon Fort Augustus and Fort William ; accord- 
ingly Keppoch and Lochiels battalions were ordered away for 
that purpose together with some French ingineers and artilary. 
Fort Augustus was taken and demolished, but we were not so 
successfull at Fort William, not being properly provided for such 
ane enterprize. 

Whilst our Low country army lay at Aberdeen some ships 
from France had landed with money and arms, together with 
about three hundred of Fitz James's dragoons, but mostly dis- 
mounted ; and now they left Aberdeen altogether February 
twenty third and marched to Elgin and the nighbourhood in 
the country of Spy. Their orders was to defend the passage of 
that river against the Duke of Cumberland who had marched 
from Stirling by the east coast with his whole army towards 
Aberdeen, haveing sent detatchments from Perth to Dunkeld, 
Castle Menzies and Blair of Athole, and before he left Perth, 
about six thousand Hessians had landed at Leith and marching 
westward by Stirling were orderd to take up their quarters at 
Perth and the nighbourhood on purpose to prevent the return 
of our Highlanders to the Lowcountry again, if we should at- 
tempt it. In our return to Inverness from Ross-shire we leanid 
that the Duke of Cumberland was marching with his whole 
army from Aberdeen in order to cross the Spy and give us bat- 
tle, understanding, no doubt, that our army was much dispersed 



THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 507 

and parlys out upon different commands. We therefore hastned 
our march back to Inverness and in a few days after we had 
joind the P. again, we were orderd to march to Nairn and from 
thence to Elgin to join those who were appointed to guard the 
Spy. About this time the Hazard sloup (which the Ps freinds 
had made themselves masters of at Montrose whilst he was in 
England, and was now employed in his service) had come from 
France to the North with money, and being chased by some of 
the Government ships of war into the Murray firth, was driven on 
shoar, whereby the money fell into the hands of Lord Raes peo- 
ple then in arms for the Government, and which might have 
been prevented if Lord Cromarty in the Ps service in that country 
had done his duty. This loss at so criticall a time contributed 
much to all our future misfortunes, we being at this time in great 
want of pay, which we had got very regularly hitherto. 

Our battalions that marched to join those who had been ap- 
pointed to guard the Spay, were Clanronalds, Ardsheels, together 
with Pitsligos horse and the French piquets. As we came near 
Elgin we found the guard on the Spey in full march back to El- 
gin, who gave out that they were neither able to guard the river 
nor fight the enemy after they had passed ; the latter was true, 
but to guard the Spey was ane easy matter. This guard was 
under the command of Lord John Drummoud. As the Duke of 
Cumberland's army was marching after them, upon our conjunc- 
tion it was deliberated whether we should wait for the enemy or 
not ; but it was thought more advisable to retreat till we should 
be joined by the rest of our army, as the Dukes whole army was 
comeing upon us and more numerous than we formerly under- 
stood them to be. In our retreat, Clanronalds batalion had the 
rear, together with the French picquets and Fitz James's horse 
to cover us from the enemys strong advanced guard, our French 
horse and they often exchanging shots, and once we thought 
they were to have actualy engadged, upon which our regiment 

3x2 



508 JOURNAL OF 

and the Stewarts of Appin under Ardsheils were orderd back to 
support the French. Upon our advanceing, Fitz James's horse 
formed themselves into the wings of our right and left, upon 
which their advanced guard of two hundred horse and the Ar- 
gyleshire Campbells, as militia, immediatly halted and drew up 
in order also, but we perceiving their whole army advanceing, 
retreated again. The Duke of Cumberland encamped on this 
ground and we marched back to Culloden muir on the fourteenth 
of April. Our army had got no pay in money for some time past, 
but rneal only, which the men being oblidged to sell out and con- 
vert into money, it went but a short way for their other needs, 
at which the poor creatures grumbled exceedingly and were sus- 
picious that we the officers had detaind it from them. To appease 
them we had oblidged ourselves to give them payment of all their 
arrears two days before the battle, which we not being able to 
perform made the fellows refractory and more negligent of their 
duty. However on Tuesday the fifteenth we lay under our arms 
upon the hill all day expecting the enemy, without any other 
provision but a sea bisket to each man. In the evening it was 
resolved in a council of war that we should march under cloud 
of night and attack the enemy in their camp at Nairn, judgeing 
that this being the Duke of Cumberlands birth-day his army 
would make merry and be less prepared for a surprize. Accord- 
ingly we sett out about eight o'clock that night, with express or- 
ders to observe the profoundest silence in our march. Our word 
was King James the Eighth. We were likewise forbid in the at- 
tack to make any use of our firearms, but only of sword, dirk 
and bayonet, to cult the tent strings and pull down the poles, 
and where we observed a swelling or bulge in the falen tent there 
to strick and push vigorously. When we had marched within 
less than three miles of the enemy we were order'd to halt, but 
by whose advice I cannot say. According to Lord George Mur- 
rays account the morning was too far advanced and the enemy 






THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 509 

probably had taken the alarm, yet he acknowledges the gentle- 
men volunteers in the van and many others were for advance- 
ing, and also seems to confess that it was the Ps positive orders 
that the attack should be made, he knowing well the then estate 
of his army, that they were in want of every thing needfull, and 
the loss of their money by the Hazard sloops falling into the ene- 
mys hands making a sudden and bold push absolutely requisite 
for his purpose. By the acknowledgement since of some of high 
rank in the Duke of Cumberlands army the design was not un- 
likely to succeed, considering the boldness of the Highlanders 
first attack and the disorder many of the soldiers &c were in 
through that days excess ; but of this affair Lord George Mur- 
ray, Colonel Ker and O'Neil have given their different accounts 
as they have also done of the next days battle of Culloden, to 
which the reader is referred. 

Upon pur return to the muir of Culoden,lho the P. had given 
orders for bringing meat and drink for us to the field, which our 
men not expecting, through their great want of sleep meat and 
drink many slipt off to take some refreshment in Inverness, Cu- 
loden and the nighbourhood, and others to three or four miles 
distance where they had freinds and acquaintances ; and the said 
refreshment so lulled them asleep that designing only to take ane 
hours rest or two they were afterwards surprised and killed in 
their beds. By this means we wanted in the action at least one 
third of our best men, and of those who did engage, many had 
hurried back from Inverness &c upon the alarm of the enemys 
aproach, both gentlemen and others, as I did myself, having only 
taken one drink of ale to supply all my need. Besides this diffi- 
ciency in our severall regiments, which amounted to above a third 
(as I said) we likewise wanted Clunies brave clann of M c Phar- 
sons, also Cromartys, which was surprized in Sutherland, Bans- 
dales M c Donalds, and Glengyle with his M c Gregors &c out upon 
command in the shire of Ross. All these unhappy circumstances 



510 JOURNAL OF THE EXPEDITION, 1745-6. 

for us considered, it is no wonder the event of this day proved so 
fatal to us as it did. Add to this, what we of the Clan M c Donalds 
thought ominous, we had not this day the right hand in battle as 
formerly and as we enjoyed in this enterprize when the event 
proved successfull, as at Gladsmuir and Falkirk, and which our 
elan maintains we had enjoyed in all our battles and struggles 
in behalf of our Royall family since the battle of Bannockburn, 
in which glorious day Robert the Bruce bestowed this honour 
upon Angus M c Donald, Lord of the Isles, as a reward for his 
never to be forgot fidelity to that brave prince in protecting him 
for above nine months in his country of Rachlin, Isla and Vist, as 
the same name has done since to his royall successor. This right 
we have (I say) enjoyed ever since unless when yeilded by us out 
of favour, upon particular occasions, as was done to the Laird of 
M c Lean at the battle of Harlaw ; but our sweet natured P. was 
prevailed on by L. and his faction to assign this honour to another 
on this fatall day, which right we judge they will not refuse to 
yeild us back again next fighting day. As to particulars of the 
Culloden battle I leave it to the abovementiond and other ac- 
counts well known to many. 

'(id . ,.-,[< .5} Ylj 






ACCOUNT OF EVENTS 



AT 



atfo Cullcfoem 



r'l i ) O J J A 



T '. 



ACCOUNT OF EVENTS 



AT ;.^,;o-,. .. 
HSU-. !;<!,. 

anfc Cullofcem 



In order to judge of the state of the P s affairs at the batle of 
Culloden, it will not be amiss to look back to the time 
1 746 of his comeing to Inverness where the Earl of Loudoun 
commanded before his comeing. 



THE Earl of Loudoun hearing of the P s comeing and that he 
was to quarter that night at Moy, the seat of the Laird of Mac- 
intosh about seven miles from Inverness, form'd a designe to sur- 
prise him and to carry him off, as he was to have but a few men 
with him for his guard. The Earl march'd from Inverness with 
the most of the garison and was within about two miles of Moy, 
where accidentily five of the P s people (who were goeing about 
their own affairs) mett with Lord Loudouns advanc'd guard, cha- 
lang'd them, being under night, and the five men finding vyho 
they were, call'd loudly for Locheill and the othere clans to ad- 
vance. Lord Loudouns people not doubting but they were there 
took flight and return'd to Inverness in great confusion, and left 
it the next day upon the P s appearing upon the riseing ground 
above it and retired with his men to the shire (or county) of Ross 
where they continued till the Earl.of Cromerty with a party was 
VOL. ii. 3u 



514 ACCOUNT OF 

sent in pursute of them, and upon his approach they retired to- 
wards Tain where we shall leave them for a while and return to 
Inverness where, on the P s arivle, he summond the Castle to 
surrender, which being refus'd,va battery wa rais'd but the can- 
non being but smale had litle effect upon it, which obliged the 
beseigers to have recourse to a sapp, which being brought near 
the angle of one of the bastions, the castle was surrenderd and 
the garison made prisoners, .which done, Brigadier Stapelton 
with Locheills and Kepochs regiments, Lord John Drummonds 
(which was not compleate, a great many of them being taken 
prisoners in their passage to Scotland) and the French picquets 
were sent to beseige Fort Augustus, which surrender'd likeways 
and the garison made prisoners, after which it, was thought pro- 
per to leave part of Lord John Drummonds regiment there and 
to send Locheills, Kepochs, the French picquets and some of 
Lord John Drummonds regiment (in all not three hundred men 
of the French) with Brigadier Stapelton to invest Fort William 
where we shall leave them and return to the Earl of Cromerty in 
pursute of the Earl of Loudoun towards Tain where he (Lou- 
doun) cross'd that ferry with his men and went over to the shire 
of Sutherland, where we, shall leave him for a while and return 
to Inverness, from which the most of the P s troops that was not 
imploy'd as above was sent to Spey-side. under the command of 
Lord John Drummond to guard that river against any surprise 
from the Duke of Cumberland who was come by that time to 
Aberdeen and had sent some of the Duke of Kingstons horse and 
some of the Campbells (Argyleshire men) to Keith (a smale vil- 
lage about six miles from the river Spey) where they were all 
surpris'd and made prisoners. 

As it was assur'd that the Duke of Cumberland was to stay at 
Aberdeen (where he threw up some works for fear of a surprise) 
till all the forces he expected should joine him, the P. on his part 
took his measures, and in order to secure a retrait in case he had 



EVENTS AT INVERNESS AND CULLODEN. 515 

no mind to fight till he got all his men together, or to march" 
into Perthshire if needfull for the better support of his army, was 
advis'd to endeavour the recovery of Blair Castle (which he 
would not allow to be burnt when he pass'd that way) which 
was possess'd by Sir Andrew Agnew with some regular troops 
under his command, as was most of the principall passes in Athole 
by the Campbells, whilst the 6000 Hessians and St. George's dra- 
goons lay at Creiff, Perth and places adjacent. Lord George 
Murray was orderd to march with the Athole men to Badenoch 
tojoine the Macphersons that lay about Riven of Badenoch (from 
the time that the P. had pass'd that way) to guard the passes 
leading too and from Athole and to get intelligence on that side. 
Being join'd they march'd with such expedition into Athole that 
they surpris'd a great many of the Campbells at Blairferty, 
Keinochen and othere posts possess'd by them, and made the most 
of them prisoners. But Sir Andrew Agnew being allarm'd by 
his outsentinells, retired into the castle (where they were shut up 
for seventeen days) which was batter'd for some days with two 
pieces of cannon, the one of three and the othere of four pound 
shot, which made but litle impression on the walls but ruin'd the 
roof. Dureing this time the Hessians march'd to relieve the castle, 
and as some of the Athole men were advanc'd as far doun as 
Dunkeld to get intelligence and to guard that, with othere passes 
on that river, there was frequent skirmishes between them and 
the Hessian hussars and some of St. Georges dragoons who came 
to reconaitre some days before the foot came up. The foot 
comeing up obliged the Athole men to retire (as they could not 
be supported at such a distance) to Pitlochrie near the famous 
pass of Killicranky, where with some others that were sent from 
Blair they continued about eight days (the Macphersons wkh 
some of the Athole men keeping Sir Andrew and his men shut 
up in the castle) allways skirmishing with the hussars' and dra- 
goons till their foot came up, which oblig'd thfc Athole men to 



516 ACCOUNT OP 

retire into the above pass, where they continued that clay, but as 
they were but few in number, Lord George call'd a councill of 
the officers who were of oppinion that the pass was not tainable, 
as it might be surrounded on all sides by such a superior number, 
and it was resolved to abandone both it and the castle, which 
was accordingly done that night. Haveing sent the cannon 
away they march'd to Riven of Badenoch without the lest in- 
terruption from the enemy, where the Macphersons were left 
as formerly, and the A thole men were sent to Spey-side, and Lord 
George proceeded to Inverness where hearing that the Earl of 
Loudoun had repass'd from Sutherland with his troops to Tarn, 
Lord George was orderd to march with some troops to joine the 
Earl of Oomerty and to give Lord Loudoun batle if he would 
stay for it. But he hearing of Lord Georges march, return 'd to 
Sutherland again, and Lord George having given the necessary 
orders to Lord Cromerty (who continued to command in that 
country) return'd to Inverness where it was resolved that the 
Duke of Perth shoud be sent to take upon him the command and 
if possible to get as many boats together as would ferry over his 
men and drive Lord Loudoun out of Sutherland if he would not 
stay to fight. The boats were got together, and the Duke of 
Perth with his men pass'd over without being perseived, and sur- 
pris'd Lord Loudouns people, oblig'd them to capitulate and made 
them prisoners (Lord Loudoun and the Lord President of the Ses- 
sion of Scotland made their escape) after which he seised upon 
some ships that lay in Firth (bay) of Tain, on board of which 
was all the valuable effects that was ship'd on board at Inver- 
ness before Lord Loudoun left it, the military chest excepted, 
which was convey'd on board of a frigate that lay in the bay. 
This done, the Duke of Perth return'd to Inverness, leaveing the 
command to the Earl of Cromerty. 

About this time the Hazard sloop returning from France with 
money arms ammunition and severale French and Spanish offi- 



EVENTS AT INVERNESS AND CULLODEN. 517 

cers on board, was chaced on shore, by an English man of war, 
in Lord Rae's country, where they landed their cargoe. Appre- 
hending no danger from the country people, they provided them- 
selves with a guide to conduct them and their cargoe to the Earl 
of Cromerty, but as they were on their march they were set upon 
by Lord Rae's people, who (after a good resistance) made them 
prisoners and carried of the cargoe, which was thought could 
not be done without the conivence of the guide, who disappeard 
before the action begane. This news being brought to Inver- 
ness, orders was sent to the Earl of Cromerty to demand satisfac- 
tion for what was done, but His Lordship being somewhat dila- 
tary in executeing his orders, Lord Rae's people getherd together 
with some of the Earl of Loudouns officers at their head. 

About this time advice was brought to Inverness that the 
Duke of Cumberland (being join'd by all the forces he expected) 
Avas begune his march from Aberdeen northwards and had or- 
derd the ships that attended him with provisions for his army to 
coast along in sight of him to Inverness, upon which orders was 
sent to the Earl of Cromerty to call in his detatchments and to 
march with all expedition and joine the P. He gave his orders 
accordingly, and himself with some of his officers went to Dun- 
robine castle to bid adieu to the Countess of Sutherland and to 
thank her for the cevilities they had received from her whilst 
they were in that country. Whilst they were amuseing them- 
selves there, the castle was surrounded by Lord Sutherland and 
Lord Rae's people who had got intelligence of their being there 
and made them all prisoners. 

Orders was sent likeways to the Macphersons and those at 
Fort Augustus and Fort William to joine the P. as soon as pos- 
sible. Those from Fort Augustus and the French picquets join'd 
on the Saturday, and Locheills from Fort William on Sunday. 
Advice was brought on Monday that the Duke of Cumberland 
was come to the Spey, and that Lord John Drummond with the 



518 ACCOUNT OP 

troops under his command was retireing, upon which the P. or- 
derd the drums to beat and the pipes to play to arms. The men 
in the toun assembled as fast as could be expected, the cannon 
was orderd to march, and the P. mounted on horseback and 
went out at their head to Culloden -house, the place of randevouz, 
and Lord George Murray was left in the toun to bring up those 
that was quarter 'd in the neighbourhead of Inverness, which 
made it pritty late before he join'd the P. at Culloden. Orders 
was sent to Lord John Dmmmond to assemble there likeways, 
w r hich he did the next day being Tuesday. 

Wednesday being the 15th of Aprile the whole army march'd 
up to the moor about a mile to the eastward of Culloden-house, 
where they were all drawn up in batle to wait the Duke of Cum- 
berlands comeing. Kepochs men join'd in the field from Fort 
William, and the whole was review'd by the P. who was very 
well pleas'd to see them in so good spirits tho' they had eat no- 
thing that day but one single bisket a man, provisions being 
very scarce and money too. 

The P. being inform'd that the Duke of Cumberland had halted 
that day at Nairn to refresh his men (the ships with his provi- 
sions came into the bay of Inverness that evening) the P. calld a 
council and after great debates, tho' neither the Earl of Cromerty 
(who by that time was prisoner tho' not known) nor the Mac- 
phersons nor a great many of the Fraizers were come up, it was 
resolved to march and endeavour to surprise the Duke in his 
camp at Nairn about twelve miles distant. Accordingly the 
march was begune between seven and eight o'clock at night ; 
the first column was commanded by Lord George Murray and 
the second by the P. The night being dark occasion 'd severale 
halts to be made to bring up the rear. When about half way 
Lord George orderd C. K. one of the Ps. aid de camps to goe 
from front to rear and to give orders to the respective officers to 
order their men to make the attack sword in hand, which was 



EVENTS AT INVERNESS AND CVJLLODEN. 519 

thought better as it would not allarm the enemy so soon and that 
their firearms would be of use to them afterwards. When he 
return'd to the front to acquent Lord George that he had com- 
ply'd with his orders, they were halted a litle to the eastward of 
Kilravock house deliberateing whether or not they should pro- 
ceed, as they had about four miles to march to Nairn where the 
enemy was incampd, or to return to Culloden, as they had not 
above an hour or at most an hour and a half to day light, which 
if not there before that time renderd the surprise impractickable, 
and the more, as it was not to be doubted but that the enemy 
would be under arms before day light as they were to march that 
morning to give the P. batle. The Duke of Perth and his bro- 
ther Lord John who had been sent to advise with the P., returnd 
to Lord George. Locheill and others that was in the front hearing 
that there was a great intervale (or distance) between the two 
lines, which it would take the most of the lime that was to day- 
light to joine, it was resolved to return to Culloden, which was 
accordingly done, and which some say was contraire to the Ps 
inclination. They march'd the shortest way back, which was 
by the church of Crey ; tho' scarce two miles from the place where 
the halt was made, it was clear daylight before the front arived 
there, which makes it plain that there was no possability of sur- 
priseing the enemy before daylight, as was design'd. The march 
was continued to Culloden, from which a great many, both offi- 
cers and soldiers, went to Inverness and othere places in quest of 
provisions, which was very much wanted, the P. with great de- 
ficulty haveing got some bread and whiskie at Culloden, where 
after he had repos'd himself a litle (he had march'd all that night 
on foot) he was acquented that the enemy was appearing, upon 
which those about Culloden were orderd to arms and severale 
officers sent to Inverness and places adjacent to bring up what 
men they could meet with. 

Whilst those about Culloden were marching up to the Moor 



520 ACCOUNT OF 

above the house, where they were join'd by about three hundred 
of the Fraizers who were just come up, C. K. went out to reeo- 
naitre the enemy, and when he returnd he told the P. and Lord 
George that their foot was marching in three columns, with their 
cavalry on their left, so that they could form their line of batle 
in an instant. The P. then orderd his men to be drawn up in 
two lines, and the few horse he had in the rear towards the wings, 
and the cannon to be dispercd.in.the front, which was brought 
up with great difficulty for want of horses. 

As there was no time to march to the ground they were on the 
day before," they were drawn up about a mile farthere westward, 
with a stone incloser on the right of the first line, and the second 
at a proper distance behind, after having reconaitred the inclo- 
ser, which run doun to the water of Ern on the right, so that no 
body of men could pass without throwing down the walls; and 
to guard against any attemps that might be made on that side, 
there was -two battallions placed faceing outward (which coverd 
the right of the two lines), to observe tlie motion of the enemy if 
they should make any attemp that way. 

The Duke of Cumberland form'd his line at a great distance 
and roarch'd in batle till he came within cannon shot, when he 
halted and placed his cannon in different places at some distance 
in his front which outwingd the P s.both to right and left, .with- 
out his cavalry, which was mostly on his left, some few excepted 
that was sent to cover the right. So soon as the Dukes cannon 
was placed he begane the cannonading, which was answer'd by 
the P s, who rode along the lines to encourage his men and 
posted himself in the most convenient place, where one of his ser- 
vants was. kill 'd. at his side, to see what pass'd, not doubting but 
that the Duke would begine the attack, as he had both the wind 
and weather (it.snow'd and hail'd very hard) in liis back. 

N. B. Here 'tis to be observed that ueither those that liad been 
with the Earl of Cromerty (he with his son and some few of his 



EVENTS AT INVERNESS AND CULLODEN. 521 

officers was only made prisoners, his men haveing march'd on be- 
fore) nor the Macphersons nor between two and three thousand 
men that had been on the field the day before, were come up. 
Notwithstanding all those disadvantages and the Dukes cannon 
playing with great execution, Lord George Murray (who com- 
manded on the right) sent C. K. to the P. to know if he should 
begine the attack, which the P. accordingly orderd. As the right 
wing was farther advancd than the left, C. K. went to the left 
and orderd the Duke of Perth (who commanded there) to begine 
the attack, and rode along the line till he came to the right 
where Lord George was, who attack'd at the head of the Athole 
men (who had the right of the army that day) with all the bra- 
very imaginable, as the whole army did, and brock the Duke of 
Cumberlands line in severale places, and made themselves mas- 
ters of two pieces of the enemies cannon (tho' they were both 
fronted and flank'd by them who keept a closs fireing from 
right to left) and march'd up to the points of their bayonets, 
which they could not see for the smoake, till they were upon 
them. 

When the attack begane, the Campbells threw doun a great 
dale of the wall of the incloser, for the dragoons on the Dukes 
left to pass to the rear of the P s army> which they did without 
receiveing one shot from the two battallions that was placed (as 
above) to observe their motions, which being perceived, and the 
constant fireing keept by the Dukes foot in the front, put the Ps. 
people in disorder, which gave the Duke a compleate victory. 
The P. retired in good order with some of his men and cross'd 
the water of Ern, at the foord in the highway between Inverness 
and Corry-brugh, without being pursued by the enemy, where he 
parted with them, takeing only a few of the Fitz James's horse 
and some gentlemen along with him up that river. The rest of 
those that was with him took the highway to Riven of Badenoch 
where they stay'd some days, expecting the answer of a letter 

VOL. ii. 3 x 



622 ACCOUNT OP EVENTS AT INVERNESS AND CULLODEN. 

that was sent to the P. which not comeing in the time expected, 
they all seperate, every one to doe the best he could for himself. 
The most of the clans went from the field of batle towards their 
respective countries. 

The publick has been no-ways favourable to Lord George 
Murray, but if they had been witness to his zeal and activity from 
the time he join'd in that affair to the last of it and his exposeing 
his persone where ever an occasion offerd, and in particular at 
the batle of Culloden where he went on with the first and came 
not off till the last, they would have done him more justice; and 
whatever sentiments they were pleas'd to say the P. had of him, 
it is scarce to be credited, for when, after the batle, C. K. went to 
acquent the P. how affairs was goeing, he (the P.) inquir'd par- 
ticularly about Lord George, and being acquented that he was 
thrown from his horse in the time of the action but was no-ways 
hurt, the P., in presence of all there present, desired C. K. to find 
him out and to take particular care of him, which 'tis to be pre- 
fium'd he would not have have done if he had had the least suspi- 
tion of what has been laid to his charge by his enemies. 



523 



LETTER. 

Coppy of a letter written after the battle of Culloden. 

IN answer to what you write about the Highland army having 
not behaved with their usual bravery or that some of the prin- 
ciple officers had not done their duty, which might be the occa- 
sion of their late misfortune, I must inform you by all I can learn, 
the men shovv'd the outmost eagerness to come to action, nor did 
I hear of any one officer but behaved well so far as the situation 
and circumstances would allow. The truth seems to be, that 
they were overpower'd by a superiour force, and their field of 
battle was ill chose, which gave the Duke of Cumberland great 
advantage especially in his cannon and horse ; another misfor- 
tune they lay under, was a total want of provisions, so that they 
were reduced to the hard necessity either of fighting an army a 
third stronger, starve, or disperse. 

As to what happen'd the day of the battle and the proceeding 
day, I shall let you know what I could learn. On the 15th all 
those of the Highland army as were assembled, were drawn up 
in line of battle, upon a moor south from Culloden facing east- 
ward ; this was done early in the morning as it was known that 
the Duke of Cumberland was cone to Nairn the night before, 
but as he did not move before midday it was judged he would 
not march that day, it being his birth day ; and as his troops 
had made no halt, from the time they left Aberdeen, it was rea- 
sonable to think he would give them a days rest. It was then 
proposed to make a night attack upon the Duke of Cumberland's 
army in their camp, which if it could be done before one or two 
o'clock in the morning might (tho' a desperate attempt) have 
had a chance of succeeding. Severall of the officers listen 'd to 
this as they knew the Duke of Cumberland was much superior to 
the Highland army. The objections to it were, that a great 

3 x2 



52* 

many of the army had not as yet join'd, particularly Keppock, 
Master of Lovat, Clunnie, Glengyle, the M'Kenzies and many 
of the recruits of Glengary and other, regiments which were all 
expected in two or three days and some of them sooner ; that if 
they should fail in the attempt and be repuls'd it would not be 
easy rallying the Highlanders in the dark ; that if the Duke of 
Cumberland was alarm'd by any of his patrolers he might have 
time to put his army in order in their camp (suppose no spy 
should give him notice) and place his cannon charg'd with car- 
touch shot as he had a mind, and his horse might be all in ready- 
ness, so as to pursue if the Highlanders were beat off; and lastly 
the difficulty of making the retreat with perhaps a great many 
wounded men, whom the Highlanders will never leave, be it 
possible to bring them off. It is to be remark'd that there was 
no intelligence of the situation of the enemys camp ; add to this 
how fatiguing it would be to march backwards and forwards 
twenty miles and probably be oblidg'd to fight next day, even 
could they make their retreat safe and not be attack'd before they 
join'd the rest of the army. 

On the other hand the Prince was vastly bent for the night 
attack and said he had men enough to beat the enemy whom he 
believed utterly dispirited and would never stand a bold and 
brisk attack. The Duke of I*.erth and Lord John Drummond 
with others seem'd to wish it, and Lord George Murray, Locheil, 
with many others were induced to make a fair tryal, what could 
be done, tho' they were very sensible of the danger, should it 
miscarry. They observed with much concern the want of pro- 
visions ; the men had got that day only a biscuit each and some 
not even that ; it was fear'd they would prove worse next day 
except they could take provisions from the enemy, and they had 
reason to believe if the men were allow'd to disperse, to shift for 
some meal, which many of them would doe if the army conti- 
nued there all night, that it would be very difficult to assemble 



LETTER. 525 

them in the event of a sudden alarm, which considering the 
nearness of the enemy might very reasonably be supposed ; and 
as they must have layen that night upon the moors near Culloden 
as they had done the night before, they knew many of the men 
would disperse without liberty to several miles distance for pro- 
visions and quarters, and that it would be far in the day before they 
would be assembled again ; and as Keppoch came up and join'd 
the army that afternoon, they flatter'd themselves that the men 
they had would do, if they could make the attack by one or two 
in the morning, especially if they were undiscover'd as they had 
great hopes they might, for having examined the difficult roads 
of which they had perfect intelligence from the M c lntoshes who 
lived in these very parts, they found they could keep upon a muir 
the whole way, so as to shun houses and be a considerable way 
from the high road that leads from Inverness to Nairn. They 
#lso consider'd that in the event of making the attack, should 
they even be beat off' without the deserved success, they might 
before day break get back the length of Kilraick, which was very 
strong ground, and from thence by a hill they could retire the 
whole way, on the south side of the water of Aim till they were 
join'd by their friends whom they expected and by the straglers ; 
nor did they believe the enemy would follow (suppose the High- 
landers were beat back) till it were good day light so as they 
could see about them, and send out reconnoitring parties to pre. 
vent their falling in snares and ambuscades, and before all this 
could be done the Highland army could have reach'd Kilraick 
and the hilly ground on the south side of the water above men. 
tion'd where regular troops could not easily overtake them and 
where their cannon and horse in which their greatest superiority 
consisted would have been of little use ; that they found the 
Prince was resolved to fight the enemy without waiting for the 
succours that were soon expected and without retiring to any 
(strong ground or endeavouring to draw the Duke of Cumber- 



526 LETTER. 

land's army further from the sea whence he got all his provisions 
that were brought about in ships which sail'd alongst as his army 
.march'd near the shore. For these reasons, them gentlemen and 
mopt others if not all who were spock to upon the subject seem'd 
to think the night attack might be attempted, but most of them 
thought they were in very bad circumstances at any rate, and 
no attempt could be more desperate than their present situation. 
Lord George Murray about midday desired Brigadier Stapletoun 
.and Collonel Ker to cross the water of Aim near where the army 
was drawn up (not far from the place where the battle was 
fought the next day) to take a view of the hill ground on the 
south side of the water, which to him seem'd to be steep and un- 
even consequently much properer for Highlanders, for the ground 
they were then drawn up upon was a large plain moor, and tho' 
in some places it was interspersed with boggs and deep ground, 
yet for the most part it was a fair field and good for horse. After 
two or three hours they return'd and reported that the ground 
was rough and rugged, mossy and soft, so that no horse could 
be of use there, that the ascent from the water side was steep 
and there was but two or three places in about three or four miles 
where horses could cross, the banks being unaccessible ; they 
could not tell what sort of ground was at a greater distance, but 
the country people inform'd them it was much like the other side 
.of the water. Upon this information Lord George Murray pro- 
posed that the other side of the water should be the place for the 
army to be drawn up in line of battle next day, but this was not 
agreed to ; it was said it was like shunning the enemy, being a 
mile further than the moor they were then upon and at a greater 
distance from Inverness, which it was resolved not to abandon, 
a great deal of baggage and amunition being left there ; this 
was before the resolution was taken for making the night attack. 
About seven at night an accident happen'd which had lik'd to 
have stop'd the designed attempt, and upon it many were for 



LETTER. 527 

giving it up as impracticable ; the thing v/as this, numbers of 
men went off to all sides especially towards Inverness, and when 
the officers who were sent on horseback to bring them back came 
vip with them they could by no persuasion be induced to return, 
giving for reason they were starving, and said to the officers 
they might shoot them if they pleas'd but they would not go 
back 'till they got meal. But the Prince continued keen for the 
attack and positive to attempt it, and said there was not a mo- 
ment to be lost, for as soon as the men would see the march be- 
gun not one of them would flinch. It was near eight at night 
when they moved, which could not be sooner, otherways they 
might have been perceived at a considerable distance and the 
enemy have got account of the march. Lord George Murray 
was in the van, Lord John Drummond in the center, and the 
Duke of Perth towards the rear, where also the Prince was, 
having Fitz James horse and others with him. Proper directions 
were given for small parties possessing all the roads that intelli- 
gence might not be carried to the enemy. There were about two 
officers and thirty men of the MIntoshes in the front as guides 
and some of the same were in the center and rear and in other 
parts to hinder any of the men from straggling. Before the van 
had gone a mile, which was as slow as could be, to give time to 
the line to follow, there was express after express sent to stop 
them, for that the rear was far behind. Upon this the van march'd 
still slower but in a short time there came aide de camps and 
other officers to stop them or at lest to make them go slower, and 
of these messages I am assured there came near a hundred before 
the front got the length of Kilraick, which retarded them to 
such a degree that the night was far spent, for from the place 
the army began to march from Kilraick was but six miles ; and 
they had still four long miles to Nairn. It was now about one 
o'clock in the morning, when Lord John Drummond came up 
to the van and told there were severalls far behind and if they did 



598 LETTER. 

not stop or goe slower, he was affraid the rear could not join ; in 
a litle time the Duke of Perth came also to the front and assur'd, 
if there was not a halt the rear would not be able to get up ; 
tliere was a stop accordingly. Locheil had been mostly in the 
van all night and his men were next tlie Athol men who were in 
the front (these two bodies made above twelve hundred men) 
there were also severall other officers that came up. There beh*g 
a defile a little way behind, occasiond by a wall at the wood of 
Kilraich, which also retarded the march of those that were be- 
hind, the officers talking of the different places of making the at- 
tacks, said it was better to make the attempt with four thousand 
men before day break as with double that number after it was 
light. Mr. Osullivan being now come up to the front and it 
being now evident by the time the army had taken to march lit- 
tle more as six miles, it would be impossible to make the other 
part of the road which was about four miles before it were clear 
day light, besides the time that must be spent in making the dis- 
position for the attack, as it could not be done by the army in 
the line on their long march, Mr. Osullivan said he had just 
then come from the Prince who was very desirous the attack 
should be made, but as Lord George Murray had the van and 
could judge the time, he left it to him whether to do it or not. 
There were several volunteers present who had walkd all night 
in the front, such as Mr. Hepburn, Mr. Hunter, Mr. Anderson 
and others, and as the Duke of Perth, Lord John Drummond and 
the other officers seemd to be much difficulted what to resolve 
upon, Lord George Murray desired the rest of the gentlemen to 
give their opinions, for they were all deeply concern 'd in the con- 
sequence. It was agreed upon all hands that it must be sun rise 
before the army could reach Nairn and form so as to make an 
attempt upon the enemies camp, for one part was to have pas&'d 
the water a mile above the town, to have fallen upon 'them to- 
wards tfee sou side ; the volunteers were all very keen to march 



LETTER. 529 

on, some of them said that the red coats would be all drunk as 
they had surely solemnized the Duke of Cumberlands birth day, 
and that tho it were day light they would be in such confusion 
they would not withstand the Highlanders ; this opinion shew'd 
abundance of courage, for these gentlemen would have been in 
the first rank had there been an attack, but the officers were of 
a different sentiment, as severals of them exprest. Locheil and 
his brother said they had been as much for the night attack as 
any could be, and it was not their faults that it had not been 
done, but blam'd those in the rear, who had march'd so slow and 
retarded the rest of the army. Lord George Murray was of the 
same way of thinking, and said if they could have made the at- 
tack, it was the best chance they had, especially if they could 
have surpris'd the enemy, but to attack a camp, that was near 
double their number, in day light when they would be prepar'd 
to receive them, would be perfect madness. By this time Mr. 
John Hay came up and told the line was join'd; he was inform'd 
the resolution was taken to return, he began to argue upon the 
point but no body minded him. This was the gentleman the army 
blam'd for the distress they were in for want of provisions, he 
having had the superintendency of all these things, from the time 
of Mr. Murray's illness, who had always been exlreamly active 
in whatever regarded the providing for the army. It w r as about 
two o'clock in the morning (the halt not being above a quarter 
of an hour) when they went back in two columns, the rear faceing 
about, and the van taking another way. At a little distance, 
they had a view of the fires in the Duke of Cumberlands camp, 
and as they did not shun passing near houses, as they had done 
in advancing, they rnarch'd very quick. Day light began to ap- 
pear in about an hour, and they got to Culloden pretty early so 
that the men had three or four hours rest. They kill'd what cat- 
tle or sheep they could find, but few of them had time to make 
any thing- ready, before the alarm came of the enemies being* 
VOL. ii. 3 y 



530 LETTER. 

upon their march and approaching. The horse of the Princes 
army had been all in so hard duty for several days and nights 
before, that none of them were fit for patroling. At that time 
Fitz James's horse and several others had gone to Inverness to 
refresh, so at first it was not known whither it was an advanced 
party, or the Duke of Cumberlands whole army ; however the 
Highlanders got ready as quick as possible and march'd thro' the 
parks of Culloden, in batalions, just as they happen'd to be lying, 
to the moor on the south side facing eastwards, and about half 
a mile farther back, than when they had been drawn up the day 
before. Lord George Murray proposed once more to pass the 
water of Earn as being the strongest ground, and much the fit- 
test for Highlanders, and Cluny who was expected every mo- 
ment was to come on that side ; but it was not agreed upon, for 
the same reasons given the day before. Speaking to Mr. O'Sul- 
livan, he told him that he was afraid the enemy would have great 
advantage in that plaine moor both in their horse and cannon, 
but he answer'd that he was sure horse could be of no use there 
because there were several boggs and morasses ; but the event 
prov'd otherways. Mr. O'Sullivan drew up the army in line of 
battle, (he being both adjutant and quarter master general) and 
having shew'd every batalion their place, the right closs to some 
inclosures near the water of Earn, and the left towards the parks 
of Culloden. I cannot justly tell what order they were drawn up 
in ; there had been some disputes a day or two before about the 
rank, but no body who had any regard for the common cause, 
would insist upon such things upon that occasion. Those who 
had gone off the night before and early that morning to Inver- 
ness and other parts had now join'd, and the Master of Lovat was 
com'd up with a considerable recruit of his men. It was observed 
that upon the right there were park walls, under cover of which 
so many of the enemy could draw up and flank the Highland 
men. Lord George Murray who commanded that wing was very 



LETTER. 53 1 

desirous to have advanced and thrown them down ; but as this 
would have brock the line, and the enemy forming their line of 
battle near that place, it was judged by those about him too 
dangerous to attempt. Both armies being fully form'd, the can- 
nonading began on both sides, after which there was some small 
alteration made in the dispositions of the two armies, by bring- 
ing troops from the second line to the first as both ends advanced 
to out flank one another. The Highlanders were much gall'd 
by the enemies cannon, and were turning so impatient that they 
were like to break their ranks, upon which it was judg'd proper 
to attack, and orders were given accordingly. The right wing- 
advanced first as the whole line did much at the same time. The 
left wing did not attack the enemy, at lest did not go in sword 
in hand, imagining they would be flank'd by a regiment of foot 
and some horse, which the enemy brought up a,t that time from 
their second line or corps de reserve. When the right wing were 
within pistol shot of the enemy, they received a most terrible fire 
not only in front but also in flank, by reason of those who were 
posted near the stone walls, notwithstanding of which they went 
in sword in hand, after giving their fire closs to the enemy and 
were received by them with their spontoons and byonetts. The 
two regiments of foot that were upon the enemies left, would have 
been intirely cult to pieces, had they not been immediatly sup- 
ported by other two regiments from their second line ; as it was, 
these two regiments (being Barrells and that call'd Monroes) 
had by their own confession above 200 kill'd and wounded. Two 
regiments of dragoons coming in upon the same side, entirely 
brock that wing of the Highlanders, and tho' three battalions of 
the right of the second line were brought up and gave their fire 
very well, yet the ground and every thing else was so favourable 
to the enemy that nothing could be done ; and a total deroute 
ensued. 

I am positively informed that the Highland army did not con- 



LETTER. 

sist of above 7000 fighting men, and the Duke of Cumberlands 
must have been ten or twelve ; in the one army there was not 
above a 150 horse, of which one half was of the regiment of 
Fitz James, in the other army they had about 11 or 1200. 

When a misfortune happens, people are apt to throw the blame 
upon persons or causes, which frequently are either the effects of 
malice or ignorance, without knowing the real springs and mo- 
tives. Severals are of opinion that the night attack could have 
been made, but I am convinced of the contrary, for the follow- 
ing reasons. The Highland army when they halted near Kil- 
raick were not above 5000 men, they had four miles to march, 
part of them were to make a considerable circumference, so that 
it would have been sun rise before they could have made the at- 
tack, the ground about Nairn where the enemy lay encamped 
was a hard dry soil and plain moors for three miles round, ex- 
cept where the sea interveen'd, the nearest strong and uneaten 
ground being the wood of Kilraick. Let it be suppos'd the High- 
landers had made an attack in broad day light upon an enemy 
double their number in their camp, who were well refresh'd 
with a day and two nights rest, with plenty of all kinds of provi- 
sions, with their cannon pointed as they thought proper, and 
their horse drawn up to their wish in a fine plain, what must the 
consequences have been ? What would have been said of offi- 
cers that led on men in such circumstances and in such a situa- 
tion ? Would it not have been certain death and destruction of 
all those who made the attack ? Would it not have been said 
(and justly said) Why gae ye on in such a desperate attempt, 
seeing it could not be done by surprise and undiscover'd as was 
projected ? Why not try the chance of a fair battle by returning 
and be join'd by the rest of the army as well as by those who had 
withdrawn the night before, as a great many others who were 
hourly expected, where also they would have cannon and might 
have choise of the field of battle? by this means there was a fair 



LETTER. 533 

chance, by the other there was none. As to the above mention'*! 
facts you may rely upon them ; I saw the Duke of Perth, the 
Duke of Athole, Lord John Drummond, Lord George Murray, 
Lord Ogilvy, Colonell Stewart of Arsheil, Colonell John Roy 
Stewart, Lord Nairn and several others at Ruthven of Badenoch, 
on the Friday two days after the battle, they all agreed in the 
same things ; one thing I must take notice of, that from the be- 
ginning of the whole affair till that time, there never had been 
the lest dispute, or misunderstanding among the officers. 

Some find fault that the night march was undertaken, seeing 
there was not a certainty of reaching Nairn time enough to make 
the attack before day light, as also that they had too few men. 
In answer to this, there was no body doubted when the march 
was begun but that there would be abundance of time ; their 
greatest precaution was, to take care not to be discover'd. The 
Highlanders had often made very quick marches in the night 
time: the French picquets were I believe in the rear, and were 
not so clever in marching ; the moor that they went thro' was 
more splashy than they expected and they were obliged to make 
some turns to shun houses, and there were two or three defiles 
that took up a good deal of time to pass ; the guides tho' they 
knew the ground very well, yet were not judges what time it 
would take to march the ten miles (as they were call'd) tho' by 
reason of the indirect road must be more. Notwithstanding of 
all this I am persuaded most of the army, had not the van been 
frequently stop'd and retarded by repeated orders and messages, 
would have been at Nairn by two o'clock in the morning. As for 
the number of men, tho' not half that of the enemy, they might 
very probably have succeeded in the attempt, had they made the 
attack undiscover'd. Nothing is more uncertain than the events 
of war, night attacks are most of all subject to disappointment. 
This march and countermarch to be sure was a thing tum'd out a 
great disadvantage, it fatigued the men much, and a council of 



534 , LETTER. 

war might have been obtain'd in which doubtless a resolution 
would have been taken, to choise a more advantagious field of 
battle, and perhaps postponed fighting for a day, till the succours 
that were coming up with the outmost expedition should join. 

Councils of war were seldom held, and were out of request 
from the time the army march'd into England. I remember but 
of two that were held there, one at Brampton, in regard of be- 
seiging Carlisle or going to attack Generall Wade, the other was 
at Carlisle, where it was resolved to march forwards ; what hap- 
pen'd at Derby was accidental!, by most of the officers being at 
the Prince's quarters ; and taking into consideration their situa- 
tion, they were all unanimous in advising the Prince to retreat. 
I think there was but one council of war call'd after they re- 
turn'd to Scotland, and that was near Crief the day after the re- 
treat from Stirling, where there was some difference of opinion, 
but it was at last iagreed, to march for Inverness in two seperate 
bodies, the one the Highland road, and the other by the coast, 
several? at first being for the army all going the same road. The 
day of the battle of Falkirk tire officers were calld in the field 
where the army was drawn up betwixt Bannockburn and the 
Tor Wood, and they all immediatly agreed to march streight to 
the enemy. As to the retreat from Stirling, it was advisd by 
many of the principal officers, particularly the clans ; they drew 
up the reasons, and signd them at Falkirk three day before tlie 
retreat was made: the chief of which were that a vast number of 
men had gone off after the battle, and were not returnd, and 
that as the seige of Stirling Castle was not advancing, they did 
not think it adviseable to fight in such circumstances. 

This letter has been much longer than 1 intended, but before 
I conclude I must acquaint you that six weeks before the battle 
of Colloden, some officers proposed sending up meal to several 
parts of the Highlands and in particular towards Badenoch, that 
in the event of the Du"ke of Ctmiberlamls marching towards 



LETTER, 535 

Inverness, before the army was gather'd they might retreat for a 
few days till they could assemble, or if a misfortune should hap- 
pen by a defeat, there might be some provisions in these parts ; 
but this was reackond a timerous advice and rejected as such, 
though I have reason to suspect that the opinion of mostly all 
the Highland officers was much the same ; they were not for 
precipitating any thing. There is no doubt the Highlanders 
eould have avoided fighting till they had found their advantage 
in so doing ; they could have made a summer campaign without 
running the risque of any misfortune ; they could have march'd 
thro' the hills to places in Aberdeen shire, Bamf shire, the Mearns, 
Angus, Perthshire, or Argyle shire by ways that no regular 
troops could have follow'd them, and if they had continued 
amongest the mountains, it must have been attended with great 
difficulties and expenses : their convoys might have been cut off, 
and opportunities have offer'd to have attacked them with almost 
a certainty of success; and tho' the Highlanders had neither mony 
nor magazines, they could not have starved in that season of the 
year, as long as there were sheep or cattle to be had. They could 
also have separated into two or three different bodies, got meal 
for some days provisions, mett again at a place appointed, and 
have attackd the enemy where lest expected. They could have 
march'd in three days what would have taken regular troops 
five, nay had those taken the high roads (as often they would 
have been oblig'd to do, upon account of their carriages) it 
would have taken them ten or twelve days. In short they would 
have been so harrass'd and fatigued, that they must have been 
in the greatest distress and difficulties and at the long run pro- 
bably have been destroy'd, at lest much might have been ex- 
pected by gaining of time. Perhaps such succours might have 
come from France, as would have enabled the Highlanders to 
liave made an offensive instead of a defensive war ; This I say 
was the opinion of many of the officers who considerd the conse- 



536 LETTER. 

quence of losing a battle. They knew well that few Highlanders 
would join heartily against them, as long as they continued in- 
tire, but would upon a defeat. There was one great objection 
to this, that the Irish officers who were as brave men and zealous 
in the cause as probably could be, and many of the Lowcountry 
men could not well endure the fatigue of a Highland campaign ; 
as to the common soldiers who came from France, there were not 
four hundred remaining, they and their officers even tho a battle 
was lost, had but to surrender, and would be prisoners of war. 
It was very different with the Scots, whose safety depended upon 
their not venturing a battle without great probability of success. 
But any proposition to postpone fighting was ill received and 
was call'd discouraging the army. I have nothing further to add, 
but that I am, &c. &c. &c. 



!)|WW/ 

! 



ACCOUNT 



OP 



Cfje gotms ^tetettoer'si Caeape, 



VOL. n. 



3z 



ACCOUNT 

OF 

Clje goung pretender's 0eape* 



Here follows a genuine historical journal of P. Charles' retreat 
from the battle of Culloden, April sixteenth, and of his many 
disasters in both the isles and continent till he embarked at 
Lochnanuagh in Arisaig, for France, the twentieth of Sep- 
tember, 1746. Written by a Highland Officer in his army. 

IP. C. having done his utmost to rally his men at the fatal battle 
of Culloden, who through many concurrent circumstances against 
them, and an over ruling Providence that disposes of all events, 
were oblidged though unwillingly to give way, yet in such order 
as to secure in great measure a safer retreat than could have been 
expected, having a regular army and many horse on their ene- 
my's side to pursue, so that he also, after having a servant killed 
near him and his own horse wounded (which horse is now in 
the possession of a Scots gentleman) followed the fate of the day 
attended only by Colonel Sulivati, Captain Allan M c donald (a 
p t) Mr. Alexander M'cloed and one Ned Burk a servant, 
and came that night (viz. sixteen 111 of April) to the house of 
Fraser of Gortleg in Stratherick, where Lord Lovat then stayed. 
Here the P. and his attendants took some refreshment and two 
hours rest. This place was Ld' from the field of battle. 



540 ACCOUNT OF 

On the tnorrow by day break the Pr. set out again for Fort- 

April Htb. * * 

Augvistus, through the country of Glengarie, and stayed that 
night at M'donald of Droynachan's house, where his supper was 
a piece of a broil'd trout. 

On Friday the eighteentli in the morning he set out again and 
held his way to Lochnargaig, where he stayed that night with 
D. Cameron of Glenpean. 

^ Saturday the nineteenth he came to Oban in Kinlochmors, a 

corner of Clanronald's estate, where he and his company lay in 
a sheelen or sheephouse, near a wood. 

Next morning he went towards the country of Arisaig, and 
halted at a little village called Glenbeastal, where Mr. Lockhart 
younger of Carnwath, and some few gentlemen of Clanronald's 
name, who had escaped thither from the battle, repaired to him 
and consulted about his safety. 

Apprehending the enemy's partys would soon come into that 
country, after four days stay at Glenbeastil, His R. H. concurr'd 
in their oppinion who judgd he ought to take to the Isles. Clan- 
ronald, who was absent at the first consultations, was of oppinion 
that the P. ought to keep the country for some time, and that he 
would cause build several small huts in different woods for his 
accomodation and change of quarters, as occasion should require 
whilst he and some other chosen persons should take a trip to the 
Isles and look out for a veshel for his passage into France, if found 
needfull. But finding the P., through the perswasion of Sulivan 
&c. disposed to repair to the Isles, Clanronald immediatly pro- 
vided a boat (which had belonged to Alexander M c donald of 
Borradil) with rowers and all necessarys for the voyage, as well 
as the time and place could afoord ; and Donald M c cloed being 
pilot, they set sail for the Isle of Uist on the twenty fourth of 
April. 

Each of them assuming borrowed names, the P. was called young 
Mr. S* Clair, Sulivan old S l Clair his father, and Captain Allan 



THB YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 541 

M'donald (the P t) Mr. Graham; but the boatmen retained 
their own names. The wind blowing a very fresh gale from the 
south-east, in endeavouring to weather the point of Arisaig, the 
boat's bowsprit broke in pieces. The night became dismally dark 
and tempestous, with some flashes of lightning, and wanting a 
compass, they were at a loss what course to steer, but at break of 
day they providentially found themselves near the island Benbe- 
cula, and accordingly put in there at the toun of Roshnish about 
eight a clock in the morning on the twenty fifth. April asth. 

Here they refreshed themselves for three days, and the P. was 
visited by old Hector M c Eachin i. e. old Clanronald, to whom this 
island of Benbecula belonged. 

On the morning of the twenty eighth, the P. set sail again for sstb. 
the Lew s Isle, bat previous hereto it was agreed that the P s 
company should give out in the Lewis that they were the crew 
of a merchant ship wreckt on the isle of Tiree and wanted to get 
home to their own country the Orkney's, and having been at 
Uist, Clanronald's brother, Boystil, advised them to go along 
with his people to the Lewis who were bound thither in order to 
hire a vesshel to carry some meal from the Orkney's to supply 
the country, by which means they hoped to return to their own 
homes. Having thus plan'd their bussiness, they set sail for the 
Lewis accordingly, with a hard gale from the south-west, and 
landed in the morning of the twenty ninth at the isle of Skalpay, 
belonging to D. M c ean oig, alias Cambel, a rigid loyalist to the 29th. 
family of Stuart. 

April the thirtieth, Donald M c cloed the pilot and four persons 
went to Stornway to bespeak a veshel for the purpose above- 
mentioned, with all expedition, and M c cloed hired a vesshel 
of forty tuns for 1 OO/. freight, but the master at last, through 
some indiscretion of Mcloed's (supposed to be the effects of 
drinking) smelling somewhat of the purpose for which the veshel 
was hired, declined going, and M c cloed, being thus disconcerted, 



542 ACCOUNT OP 

even proposed to purchase the vessel at a very high price, which 
encreased the suspicion, and the matter taking- air, it began to 
be blazed abroad that the P. was at Lewis ; so that M c cloed, sus- 
pecting the danger and fatal consequences, return'd to the P,, 
then at Lady Kilduns house in Arynish, and apriz'd him of all that 
had happen 'd. Upon this, the P. and his attendants repair'd to 
their yoal they had left at Lochseafort ; as they were launching 
it, M c cloed the pilot ask'd some of the countrey people who were 
gazing after them, if there was any among them who for a good 
hire would pilot them to Lochfraon, an harbour in the shire of 
Ross in Lord Seaforth's countrey, but none gave answer ; how- 
ever, the putting this question suggested that they design'd to 
go for Ross-shire, purposing however to take a quite different 
course. 

May 6th. They accordingly set out in the evening May the sixth, those 
upon the shoar noticing their course ; but night coming on pre- 
vented their further observation ; and tho the wind favoured the 
purpose, they gave out that it was contrary to their intended 
course, which obliged them to take shelter in the creek of a smalt 
island at the foot of Lochalg, where by a storm and contrary 
winds they were obliged there to remain for two nights, and 
could perceive some Lewis veshels pass them, bound for Loch- 
fraon, in quest of them. 

8th. Qn May the eighth the wind changing to the north, they took 

to sea in the night and landed at Rainish near Rossnish in the 
isle Benbecula, where they had landed on their first leaving the 
main land, and were visited again, upon coming to Rossnish, by 
old Clanronald and his Lady, who gave them all the accommo- 
dation that place could affoord. 

Here it was debated whether the P. should stay in old Clanro- 
nald's house ; but at last it was judged more proper he should be 
lodged in the forrest-house of Glencorridale, a remote place yet 
centrical for corresponding with his friends in Uist, and by its 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 543 

situation most convenient either for takeing to the hills or the sea 
in case of an allarm. Accordingly this house was fitted up as 
well as could be for the P 's reception, and scouts placed on all 
hands for intelligence, a boat being provided also for his going 
to sea, and guides in case of need to take thro the mountains. 
Accordingly the P. and his small retinue, with very little cere- 
mony, took up his quarters in the house in the forrest in the Isle 
of S. Uist, attended by Colonel o'Sulivan, Captain Allan M c do- 
nald (Pr t) and Captain O'Neal, the two Rories and Alexander 
and John MMonalds, all formerly officers in H. R. H. service in 
Clanronald's regiment, with a dozen other sturdy clever fellows 
that served as guards and for dispatches. 

This island of Uist is accounted the best in Scotland for game, 
having plenty of deer, wild fowl &c. ; and here the P. diverted 
himself often, and was observed to be very dexterous at shooting 
fowl upon wing; and indeed he ever chearfully bore all his crosses 
and adversitys with a most magnanimous spirit and the greatest 
Christian resignation. 

And now his enemys were got together upon the coast towards 
the Isles on Moidart side, which made old Clanronald, who often 
attended the P., to apprehend a sudden visit from them ; yet he 
would not leave S. Uist, when the danger was signified to him, 
till he should receive some further intelligence. In the mean 
time old Clanronald went over to the main land in order to learn 
how matters went, and apprise the P. in case of further danger 
from that side. 

. ; It was about the end of June when Captain Ferguson landed June, 
in the isle of Bara with some hundereds of soldiers, and three 
hundered of the M c cloeds of Sky at the same time came over to 
Benbecula, all in quest of our dear P. 

General Cambel with a strong party saiPd to St. Kilda, the re- 
motest of the western isles, the property pf the Laird of M c cloed, 



544 ACCOUNT OF 

and from thence was to return by Uist, while the whole coasts of 
Sky, Uist &c. and channel towards the main land was covered 
with ships, schooners and arm'd veshels; so that the P. and his 
few attendants were environed on all hand and to be attack'd 
both by sea and land. It was now therefor full time to concert 
measures for his safety, and accordingly Lieutenant Alexander 
M c donald my nephew was sent to the south end of the island, 
there to observe Captain Ferguson's motions, also Lieutenant 
Rory M c donald my brother, to the north side, to learn and bring 
notice of the rout which the M'cloeds were to take, and were 
appointed both of them to meet at Lochbeistel, a centrical place, 
to concert measures for further intelligence. By these gentlemen 
the P, understood that both partys were to march from end of 
the isle in search of him, till they should meet in the middle of 
the country. 

It is impossible to express the perplexity of mind the P 's few 
attendants were in (upon this intelligence,) for his safety. How- 
ever, they immediatly repair'd to the top of a hill in this S. Uist, 
called Beinil-koinish, from which eminence they could have a 
large prospect, and here consulted how the P. should get out of 
Uist, tho' late; and now it was that they thought of getting Miss 
M c donald for their assistant. Accordingly they seperated till they 
should come to a sheeling (or sheep cottage) called Ashary, within 
a mile of Milnton, where Flora Mdonald keept house with her 
brother young Milnton. At first the proposal of her being assistant 
in making the P 's escape startled her, but when spoke to se- 
riously, she condescended to undergoe any danger for H. R. H. 
safety. Accordingly she goes for the isle Benbecula to old Lady 
Clanronalds to provide suitable cloaths for Betty Burk (the name the 
P. was to take) engadged to goe home with her to JSkie as her ser- 
vant. The good old lady accordingly provided what was necessary 
for this disguise, and they both (the Lady and Miss Flora) set out 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 545 

for Lochniskava in Benbecula where the P. and his few at- 
tendants waited for them with a small shallop-boat ready to take 
the sea. 

Is was now the twenty eighth of June when Lady Clanronald 
dress'd up the P. in his new habit, not without some mirth and 
railry passing amidst all their distress and perplexity and a mix- 
ture of tears and smiles. The dress was on purpose coarse and 
homely, suited to the station of the wearer, viz, a callico gown 
with a light coulered quilted pettycoat, a mantle of dun camelot 
made after the Irish fashion with a hood joined to it. 

Here the P. in his new disguise parted with Lady Clanronald, 
with thanks for all her troble, as he did likewise with his other 
Highland attendants; Colonel O'Sulivan, Captain Allan M c donald 
(the Pr t) and such as could not speak Erse having parted with 
the P. some days before, as had also Donald M c cloed the pilot and 
O'Neal likewise two days befor this voyage to Side. And now 
our noble exil'd P. parted with all his friends except his new 
mistress my nephew Lieutenant M c donald and the boatmen, 
and set out from Benbecula for Side with a gentle breeze in his 
sails about one a clock afternoon. 

Next day they were surrounded with a thick fog which made 29th. 
them suspect they might err in their course and come unawares 
upon the island, which made the rowers drop their oars till the 
fog should disperse, which it did soon after, and mistaking the 
point of Snod for the point of Waterniesh, and the wind blowing 
fresh from the land, they were obliged to row closs by the shoar 
for shelter, but seeing some men in arms who called out to them 
to land, at their peril, this made them alter their course a little and 
stand out from the land; but plying their oars gently to prevent 
any suspicion, on their refusing to land some musquets were fir'd 
at their boat, but without any harm, my nephew sitting closs by 
the helm. Upon the shot from the shoar by the Mcloeds (who 
were the people they saw in arms) the P. encouraged the men at 

VOL. II. 4- A 



546 ACCOUNT OF 

the oars not to fear the villans, so they plyed their oars most assi- 
duously but without any disorder, saying they had no fear for 
themselves but only for him " No fear of me" replyed the P. 
And indeed they had always a confidence in whatever he said to 
them, God seeming 1 still to work a passage for him from time to 
time. Yet having seen three boats at the shore, they suspected 
they would be pursued, however pulling on with all their force 
they at length doubled the tedious point of Waterniesh and hereby 
left the M c cloed's country behind them ; and although Sir Alex- 
ander M c donald had not joined the P., they still expected more 
favour from his people than from the cold M c cloeds, besides that 
Mr. Mdonald of Kingsburgh was trysted to meet the P. upon 
the shore of Moydhslat the place of Sir Alexander's residence. 

Accordingly they landed upon the twenty ninth day of June 
at Moydhslat, when Miss M c donald having conducted her charge 
to a proper place in the fields, dismissal the boat with orders to 
return to Uist. Miss then repaired to Sir Alexander M c donald's 
house, where she met with Kingsburgh, and he soon with proper 
refreshment of a bottle of wine and bread found out the P. in 
his retirement in the fields. In the evening he conducted the P. 
to his own house, where he stayed one night, the next day chang- 
ing his woman's dress, that he was in such disguise being known 
to his pursuers. Kingsburgh committed him to the care of Mal- 
com M r cloed at Portree, and he conveyed him to the old Laird 
of M c kinnon. 

After two or three days stay with him, finding the P 's dan- 

jiy ioth. ger greater by being in the islands, on the tenth of July, old 

M c kinnon with four of his people ferryed him over to the main 

r.u-nsaric s land to a place called Buarblach, in Glencrarie's lands in Knoy- 

Morrar. 

dart; yet it was the P 's choice to go immediatly into Clan- 

ronalds country. M c kinnon having parted with the P. upon the 

lath. twelfth, he then sail'd for Lochnevis, and as they were turning at 

Young Clan- . f 

rmmidi W ri- a point were met by some of the Sky militia (whom Sir Alex- 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 547 

ander M r donald had sent out to join the Duke of Cumberland) 
who put the ordinary questions to the P 's people, from whence 
they came and whither they were bound, to which being an- 
swered undauntedly, suitable to the time, the militia let them pass 
without further notice. The P. pursued his course further up 
the Loch, and having once got out of sight, they immediatly 
landed and travelled all that day and the night following through 
woods and hills till they arrived on the thirteenth at Moror in JUK u 
Clanronalds estate and was well received by the Laird of Moror, 
viz. Lieutenant Colonel MMonald of Clanronalds regiment, whose 
houses being all brunt by Cumberland's army, he lodged the P. 
in a small hutt, where he rested one day and set out again in the 
night betwixt the fourteenth and fifteenth, accompanied by Cap- uth and 
tain M c kinnon and a guide, and arrived befor day at Boradale, 
the place of his first landing, and was welcomed by Angus 
M c donald of that place, who also having his houses and eflects 
brunt by the party under General Cambels command, was obli- 
ged to carry H. R. IL to a hutt in a neighbouring wood, where 
he entertain'd him in the best manner he could for three days. 

On the eighteenth H. R. H. wrote a letter to Alexander isth. 
Mdonald of Glenaladale, Major to Clanronald's regiment, and 
who was well known to H. R. H. befor, requiring him to come 
to him to concert measures anent his future motions. This letter 
he sent by John MMonald junior, son to Angus M'donald of Bo- 
radle his late landlord. Immediatly after sending of this ex- 
press, H. R. H. got an account of the Laird of M r kinnon's being- 
taken prisoner, upon which it was judg'd proper that the P. 
should remove four miles further eastward, to an almost inacces- 
sible cave known only to a few in the country, accompanied by 
Angus M c donaldof Borradle and his son Ronald, formerly Lieu- 
tenant in Clanronalds own company, where he was to stay till 
denaladale should come to him. 

On the twentieth at night Glenaladale met with the forsaid soth. 

4A2 



548 ACCOUNT OF 

Angus M'donahl at the place they had formerly agreed upon, 
from whence he was conducted to the P. 

-1,1. On the twenty first, Angus M r donald got a letter from a son 
in law of his, acquainting him that it was whispered in the coun- 
try that H. R. H. was with them, and representing how danger- 
ous it was for them to stay any longer in that place, and making 
an offer of a place he had prepared where they would be more se- 
cure for some time; accordingly Ronald M'tlonald was sent to 
reconoiture the place. 

d. On the twenty second, Lieutenant John M c donald being sent 

to view the sea coast and learn the enemys motions, he returned 
with the news of their seeing a small boat, somewhat like one of 
the enemys tenders which allarmed that coast ; upon which, the 
P. thought proper to quit his present grotto, without waiting for 
the return of his new quarter master (sent the day befor to the 
Glen of Morar) and repaired to the place intended for him there* 
The P., accompanied by Major M c donald of Glenaladale and 
Angus M c donald of Boradale, with John junior his son, travell'd 
till they came to a place called Corrybeine Cabir, where they 
were met by Angus MMonald's son in law who, as abovemen- 
tioned, had a place prepar'd for them in the Glen of Morar, who 
informed H. R. H. that Clanronald was come within a few miles 



hand writing. 

of them, in order to conduct him to a safe place he had prepared 
for that purpose; but the P. having gone too far in his way to- 
wards the Glen-morar quarters and it being too late to go to the 
place where Clanronald was, or send for him that night, he pur- 
sued his former course, supposing he would have time enough to 
send to him next day. 

Angus M c donald having gone befor, upon his arrival in Glen- 
Young cun- morar an information came to him that General Cambel with 

ronald's hand . 

wiling. some men of war and troops had anchor'd at Lochnavies, the 
place where the P. landed at his coming from the Isles; where- 
upon two men were sent away by way of Loch-morar to Loch- 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 549 

navies to observe General Carnbel's motions, but before they had 
time to return, Angus M r donald came back on the twenty third 
early in the morning without wailing for the necessarys he went 
for, and brought intelligence that Captain Scot was come with 
his party to the lower part of Arisaig from Glengary's Morrar. 
The P. hereby finding that Clanronald's country was wholly sur- 
rounded by the Government's troops, it was resolved that he 
should leave it in all haste, especially since it was impossible to 
join young Clanronald, the enemy being already between them 
and the place where Clanronald was. Accordingly the P. set 
out, accompanied only by Glenaladale and his brother Lieute- 
nant John Mdonald and the other Lieutenant John M c donald 
junior, son to Boradale* being obliged to part witli Angus M r do- 
nald and his son in law Angus M c Eachine, surgeon formerly to 
Glengary's regiment, that they might the more easily pass undis- 
covered by the guards that lay in their way, and by twelve 
a clock they came to the top of a hill in the outmost bounds of 
Arisaig, called Scoorvuy, when having taken some refreshment, 
John Mdonald, Glenaladale's brother, was sent to Glenfmnin, 
the outmost bounds of Clanronald's country and Glenaladale's 
property, as we'll for intelligence as to bring two men Glenala- 
dale had stationed there, and appoint them to join the P. about 
ten a clock at night in the top of a hill above Lochairkaig in 
Lochiel's country, called Swernink Corrichan. Lieutenant John 
M c donald being sent off, the P. set out, and by two a clock came 
to the top of a neighbouring hill called Fruigh-vein, where ob- 
serving some cattle in motion, the P. and Lieutenant M c donald 
junior stood back, and Major M c donald Glenaladale went to .ex- 
amine what it might mean, and found it to be some of his own 
tennants, driving their cattle out of the reach of the troops, who 
by this time, to the number of six or seven hundred, were come 
to the head of Lochairkaig on purpose to enclose the P. in Clan- 
ronald's country, whilst a narrow search was making within it. 



550 ACCOUNT OP 

This being the rout they were to hold disconcerted the P ' 
company not a little ; however, \ipon this intelligence by Major 
M c donald of Glenaladale, they resolved to alter their course; 
accordingly the Major sent one of his ten nan ts express to Glenfin- 
nin, about a mile distant, to call back Lieutenant M c donald, 
Glenaladale's brother, and the two men that were stationed there 
for a guard. He sent likewise another tennant to a neighbouring 
hill for one Donald Cameron of Glenpean, whither he had re- 
moved with his effects upon the approach of the soldiers, in order 
to learn from him the situation of the troops about Fort Au- 
gustus, and to guide H. R. II. through their guards if possible. 
Whilst the P. and Major M r donald with Lieutenant M r donald 
junior waited the return of both the expresses, one of Glena- 
ladale's tennants wives, regrating the condition she saw him 
in, and willing to refresh him in the best manner she could 
(suspecting nothing of H. R. H. being in company with him) 
milked some of her cattle and brought it to them. The P. ob- 
serving the woman coming towards them, covered his head with 
a handkerchief and passed for one of the Major's servants who 
had got a headach, and notwithstanding the good womans pre- 
sent was very seasonable, the day being excessive hot, yet they 
could have excused her complement at that time, so ticklish was 
their present situation ; however the Major thank'd her and 
used some policy to dismiss her, and get some of the milk re- 
served for H. R. H. 

The express sent to Glenfinnin returned soon after without 
finding Lieutenant M c donald senior (i. e. Glenaladale's brother) 
nor the two men who were stationed in Glenfinnin, they havingrun 
off with intelligence to the place where they expected to have 
found Major M c donald (Glenaladale), and brought word that 
one hundred of the Argylshire militia had come to the very foot 
of the hill where the P. now stayed ; whereupon it was thought 
proper to dislodge, and as there was no time to wait for Donald 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 551 

Cameron of Glenpean who was sent for as a guide, trusting in 
the great Guide of all, H. R. H. with great resolution and chear- 
fullness set out about sunset with his small retinue. They tra- 
velled pretty hard till about eleven at night, when passing 
through a hollow way between two hills, they observed a man 
coming doun one of the hills towards them, upon which the P. 
and Lieutenant M c donald slept aside while Major Mdonald went 
towards to know whether he was friend or foe, and, as Provi- 
dence directed, found him to be their desired guide Donald Ca- 
meron, whom the Major immediatly conducted to H. R. H. to 
whom he gave an account as far as he had learned of the situa- 
tion of the Goverment's troops, and undertaking to guide them 
by the guards, they pursued their way through roads almost im- 
passible even in daylight. 

After travelling all night they came about four a clock in the 
morning, July the twenty-fourth, to the top of a hill in the braes j H i y 
of Lochairkaig called Mamnyn-Callum, from whence they could 
(without the help of a perspective glass) discern their enemys 
camp, being not above a mile distant. Being informed by their 
guide that the hill on which they now were had been searched 
the day before, they supposed there would not be a second search 
that day, and therefor resolved to keep on the hill all the day, 
and chusing the fastest properest place for their purpose resolved 
all together to take a little rest. After two hours sleep, the Ma- 
jor, the Lieutenant and new guide got up to keep centry, and 
about ten a clock forenoon they observed a man at a small di- 
stance. Cameron the guide being in his country and near home 
and best acquainted with the inhabitants, was sent to speak with 
him, but upon coming up with him found him to be Lieutenant 
Mdonald the Major's brother, who not meeting with the P. at 
the place appointed and having no intelligence of the enemy's 
being so near till he saw them, he became apprehensive of what 
might have happened, and regrating his having the misfortune. 



ACCOUNT OP 

of parting with his P. went in search of him wherever Provi- 
dence directed, and thus came just to the place where he was, 
who was much pleased thus to find him safe, the whole company 
having given him for lost. They continued on the top of the 
hill all that day, and about nine a clock at night set out again 
to the southward, and about one a clock in the morning on the 
oih. twenty fifth came to a place called Corrinangaull on the confines 
between that place of Glengarie's country called Knoydart and 
that part of Lochiel's country called Lochairkaig, where the 
guide expected to meet with some of the Lochairkaig people 
who had fled wilh their cattle and in whom he had confidence 
for some supply of provisions, which was now much wanted, 
having only a small quantity of butter and some oatmeal which 
they could not prepare, as they travelled almost always in sight 
of the enemy if it was daylight, and durst make no fire, the 
troops being encamped in a direct line from the head of Lochiel 
to the head of Lochruin, dividing Knoydart from that part of 
M c cloed's country called Glenealg, each little camp within half 
a mile of the other, and the Gentries placed within call of each 
other, and patrooling partys going every quarter of an hour to 
keep the centrys alert, that it might be impossible for our dear P. 
to escape or get through this chain. In this situation they were 
and in want of provisions when the P. and the two Lieutenants 
M c donalds staying behind, Major M c donald (Glenaladale) and 
the guide (Glenpean) ventured doun to some sheeling-huts, 
expecting to meet with some of the people, but found none; 
they therefor resolved to go to a fastness in the brow of the hill 
at the head of Lochnaigh and about a mile distant from the 
troops ; this they chose as the safest place for them to take an 
hours rest. After this short sleep, the guide and the eldest Lieu- 
tenant, the Major's brother, were sent off to the hill above them 
to enquire for some provisions, the Major and the other Lieutenant 
his cousine standing sentry while the P. sleept. When the sun 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 

began to shine, they observed one of the enemys camps was 
pitched at the head of Lochnaigh, an unpleasant prospect so near 
them ; however they resolved to wait the return of their provisors 
who came back about three a clock afternoon and brought only 
two small cheeses, which was but a mouthfull to each of them. 
They also brought intelligence that about an hundred red coats 
(i. e. soldiers) were marching up the other side of the hill where 
they were, in order to destroy and carry off such of the poor in- 
habitants as had fled to the hills for shelter. Here the search for 
H. R. H. was general and very narrow all around, yet did he 
and his little company keep their ground till about eight a clock 
at night, when they set out travelling very quick till it became 
dark, and climbing a steep hill called Drimachosi they observed 
from the top of it the fires of a camp directly in their front, 
which they could scarcely shun ; however they were resolved to 
pass at any rate, and came so near as to hear the soldiers talking 
together, without being noticed, and creeping up the nixt hill 
they no sooner got to the top than they spyed the fires of another 
camp at the foot of the hill in the way they were to have gone 
down ; but turning a little westward they passed betwixt two of 
their sentrys about two a clock in the morning on the twenty July ae 
sixth. 

After travelling, as they judged, about two miles, they came 
to a place on the Glenealg side of the head of Lochairn, called 
Corriscorridill, where having chosen a secure place, they took 
such refreshments as their circumstances could afford, H. R. H. 
covering a slice of cheese with some oatmeal in place of bread, 
which tho' but dry fare he eat very chearfully, and drunk some 
spring water, and passed the whole day in this place till about 
eight a clock at night. 

The guide being acquainted no further in the course the P. 
intended to hold, yet hoping they would find some other trusty 
guide, Cameron and the Major resolved to look about ; they had 

VOL. II. 4 B 



554 ACCOUNT OF 

no sooner quit their fast hold, than they found that they had 
lodged all day within cannon shot of two little camps, and saw 
a company of soldiers getting in some sheep into a hut for 
slaughter. Of this they soon came back to give the P. notice, 
cap4ain Ai. whereupon he immediatly set out, and by three a clock next 
handwriting, morning came to Glenseil in Seaforth's country ; and as provi- 
sions had now run short, the Major and Lieutenant John M c do- 
nald, Boradale's son, were sent out to provide some and find out 
a guide to conduct them to Pol lew, where it was reported some 
French veshels had been. While the Major was communing 
with some country people about a guide, a Glengarie man came 
running up to them ; he had been chased by the soldiers that 
morning from Glengarie after they had killed his father the day 
before. The Major knew this man at first sight and that he had 
served in the P 's army, and confiding in him as a trusty fellow, 
resolved to keep him in reserve as a guide in case of need and 
they should be oblidged to alter their course, tho' he did not in- 
timate this purpose to the Glengarie man. The Major having 
furnished himself with some provisions, returned to H. R. H., 
when, after eating, they retired to the face of an adjacent hill 
to take some sleep, which they did, and rising up about four or 
five afternoon they dismist their old guide Donald Cameron, after 
whose departure the Major observing the Glengarie man passing 
by in his way to his own country, slipt out of his den and took 
him aside to a by place (till he should know more assuredly of 
their intended guide) and returning to the P. again consulted 
with him anent keeping of him for that purpose, which H. R. H. 
approved of. About seven at night the man who undertook to 
furnish the guide came to the place where the Major had ap- 
pointed him, and the Major repairing thither understood by him 
that the only French ship which had been there was gone and 
that no guide could be got. The Major finding it in vain to 
proceed further towards Pollew, perswaded the man who was 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 555 

sent in quest of a guide, to return to bis own country, and so 
dismist him, and returning to the P. told him what had pass'd ; 
and it was resolved that H. R. H. should change his course. 
Accordingly the Glengarie man was introduced to the P., who 
chearfully undertook to conduct him; so they set out late at 
night, and after travelling about half a mile, the Major stopt and 
clapping his hand to his side, mist his purse in which was a 
purse of gold the P. had given him to keep for defraying their 
charges and which he had forgot at their last setting out. Upon 
this, he and Lieutenant M'clonald, Boradale's son, returned, and 
coming to their last resting place found the purse, but upon 
opening it found the little purse of gold which lie had put within 
it w r as gone. Reflecting it might have been taken away by a 
little boy whom their landlord had sent with a present of milk to 
the Major, as he supposed, (for he knew nothing of the P. being 
with him) this boy they had left at the place where the purse was 
forgotten, and accordingly the Major and Lieutenant M c donald 
went back a mile further to their landlord's house, whose name 
was Gilchrist Mrath, and through his means got the boy to re- 
store all back, which he did to a trifle. So returning by a dif- 
ferent road they got up again with H. R. H. who began to be in 
pain for them, lest they had falln in the way of an officer and 
two privates under arms who passed their road near by the place 
where the P. was during their absense. But observe on how 
slight an accident, tho' important in the eye of Providence, the 
fate of the greatest personages depend ! for had not this accident 
stopt the P 's progress, he had undoubtedly falln in these per- 
sons way, in which case one may judge how fatal the conse- 
quences of this rencounter might have been, as likewise his ene- 
my's chasing the Glengarie man thirty miles (as mentioned 
above) out of his way, whereby he fell into the poor P 's hands 
who needed him as a guide. 

The P. having now gotten his few friends about him again, 



556 ACCOUNT OP 

they travell'd on all the remainder of the night, and came to a 
hill side above Stathchluanie, and chnsing a fast place, took 
some rest till towards three a clock afternoon, when having set 
out again and travell'd about a mile along the hill side, they 
heard the firing of small arms on the hill above them, which 
they judged to be some of the troops pursuing the people who 
had fled with their cattle and effects to the hills, as was frequently 
done. Upon which occasions, were I to be particular, such bar- 
baritys and monstrous scenes of wickednesses were perpetrated 
by murdering the aged, the innocent and the young, by ravish- 
ing the women weak and helpless, and destroying their habita- 
tions by fire &c. as is horrible to relate ; when those who escaped 
their savage hands by flight were often found perishing with 
hunger and cold in the fields and caverns of the hills ; when such 
things were committed wantonly and needlessly as would seem 
incredible to relate, and which the posterity of those sufferers 
never will, never can forget, and it will become their dolefull 
tale to tell their children to future generations. Such was the lot 
of numbers in the Highlands, which in the lower and less excep- 
tionable part of the country was mostly confined to rifling and an 
universall desolation by fire of all the Protestant Nonjurant places 
of worship in the kingdom ; and the impression which all these 
dismal scenes have made upon my mind have forcibly drawn 
me away from pursuing the thread of my dear P 's story, to 
which I return. 

The P. and his company steering their course northward, 
mounted a high hill betwixt the braes of Glenmoriston and 
Strathglas and reached the top of it late at night, where it being 
dark they were oblidged to lodge all night, the only shelter 
H. R. H. had being an open cave where he could neither lean 
nor sleep, being wet to the skin with the rain wiiich had falln 
all that day, and having no fewel to make fire with, his only 
way to make himself warm being by smoaking a pipe. 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 557 

About three a clock in the morning on the 29th, Lieutenant July 29111, 
M c donald, the Major's brother, and the Glengarie guide were 
sent in quest of some trusty persons to conduct the P. to Pollew, 
and were appointed to return to the top of a neighbouring hill 
where the P. and his retinue \\ere to meet them. H. R. H. having 
set out about five a clock in the morning, after two hours travel 
arrived at the top of the appointed hill, whither the guide also 
came and told them that he was directed by some proper per-. 
sons, he had found out, to tell the Major (knowing nothing of 
the P.) to repair to a cave in the braes of Glenmoriston, called 
Coiraghoth, where they promised to come at an appointed hour 
with some victuals. Accordingly they came to the place, and 
meeting with the P. they immediatly knew him, having formerly 
served in his army ; for hitherto they had suspected the young 
man, who they heard was with the Major, to be young Clanro- 
nald. These new guides conducted the P. to his cove, where having 
eaten something, he was soon lull'd asleep with the sweet mur- 
murs of a gliding stream that run through the grotto just by his 
bedside. In this romantick habitation the P. stayed three days, 
and was so much refreshed that he thought himself now able to 
encounter any hardships. While they stayed in this place, they 
provided themselves in some necessarys and sought for intelli- 
gence about the enemy's motions. 

August the second they removed their quarters two miles fur- August gj. 
ther to Coirin head bain and put up in another romantick cove; 
and here they staid four days and were informed that one Cam- 
bel, factor to Lord Seaforth and captain of militia, had pitched 
his camp not far distant to graze a great herd of cattle. They 
therefor set out again and travelld further northward till they 
came in upon the hights of the Chisolms country called Strath- 
glas, having left one of their party behind, in the braes of Glen- 
moriston, to observe Campbel's motions ; who brought back no- 
tice that they need not be under any apprehension for that night, 



558 ACCOUNT OF 

whereupon H. R. H. was conducted to a sheepcot or wheeling, 
and a bed was made up for him, of a long fail or turf with the 
grass side upmost and a pillow of the same, where he sleep'd 
soundly all night, and remained here three days, during which 
time an express was sent off to Pollew to know the certainty of 
a report of some French veshels being seen on the coast. They 
followed their express in the road to Pollew, and passing through 
a long muir put up that night at another sheeling, and about 
USIM ioth. twelve a clock nixt day, being the tenth, arrived at a place called 
Glencanna, and passing the day in a neighbouring wood, re- 
paired at night to a village near. About two a clock in the morn- 
" ll1 - ing on the eleventh, they scrambled up a hill on the north side 
of Glencanna, and sending two of their number to find some pro- 
visions, they stayed two days in a neighbouring sheeling, wait- 
ing the return of their express to Pollew, who at last brought 
them notice that a French ship had been upon the coast and that 
two gentlemen from on board had gone to Lochiel's country in 
search of H. R. H. The P. being anxious to know if they had 
any dispatches for him, resolved to turn back again in order to 
meet with these gentlemen. 

lath. Upon August the thirteenth they cross'd the water of Casina, 

and holding near by young Chisolm's house came about two a 
14th - clock in the morning to a place called Fassanacoil in Strathglas ; 
and before H. R. H. should venture any further, it was concerted 
to send some spies to the braes of Glengarie and Lochiel's coun- 
try, in order to learn whether the search for the P. was over, and 
if the troops were returned to their camp at Fort Augustus. In 
the mean time they concealed themselves three days in a very 
thick wood, the inhabitants in the neighbourhood never dream- 
ing of the P. being so near them. At length the spies brought 
back notice that tlie troops were return'd to their camp ; where- 
nth, upon H. R. H. set out on the seventeenth in the morning, and 
travelling through an unfrequented road came again to the braes 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 559 

of Glenmorislon, and passing the day on the top of a hill, set out 
again at night, and had not travell'd a mile, when they learn'd 
that a strong party of soldiers had come to the hights of Glenga- 
rie in quest of the P. Hereupon they stopt in their journey, till 
the enemy's motions should be further known, and therefor past 
the remainder of this night in a sheeling hutt. 

August the eighteenth in morning, three expresses were sent An S nt i 
off, two to Lochairkaig in Lochiel's country, to seek for one Clunes 
Cameron and let him know that Major M'donald wanted to meet 
with him in a convenient place ; and the third express was to goe to 
the braes of Glengarie and to bring back word if the party 
they were informed of the night before had return'd to the camp or 
not, that if the road was clear, the P. might pursue his journey. 
Accordingly the expresses were sent off, and on the nineteenth, the loni 
one from Glengarie brought notice that the coast was clear ; where- 
upon H. R. H. and his little company (being ten in number) set 
out in the afternoon under the favour of a fog, and passing through 
Glenmoriston and Glenlyne, came late at night to the brae of Glen- 
garie, and as they came to the water of Garie, the rain coming on 
very heavy, it was swell'd to a great hight, and having sent two 
of their party to foord the water they thought it passable. The P. 
and his company, in wading the water found it reached their mid- 
dle, but got over safely, and travelling a mile further, the night 
being very dark, they were oblidged to pass it on the side of a 
hill without any shelter or covert, tho' it rain'd excessively. 

Nixt day it continuing to rain also very hard, they travell'd soth. 
six miles over hills and muirs till they reached the brae of a place 
called Achnasalt, the place appointed for the expresses to meet 
them ; where having past the day very incommodiously, it rain- 
ing heavy both within and without, beginning to despair of their 
expresses, and being intirely run out of provisions of all kind, 
and quite strangers to the situation of Lochiel's country at this 
time, they began to consider what was to be done. In the midst 



560 ACCOUNT OF 

of their perplexity the express return'd and brought the Major 
word from Mr. Cameron of Clunes that he could not wait on him 
that night, but directed him to lodge all night in a certain wood 
within two miles of them, and that he would be with them nixt 
morning. Accordingly two of their number were detached to 
take a view of their new habitation and found it indeed a very 
fast place. And here good Providence, which ever supported the 
P. in all his necessitys, in their present want brought a large hart 
deer in his provisor's way, which they killed at the very place 
where he was to lodge that night. The P., after permitting Major 
M c donald (Glenaladale) to acquaint D. M c donald of Lochgarie 
of their arrival in that place and to send for him, set out for his 
quarters and feasted most elegantly upon his venison. 

Lochgarie having joined them that night, they took some rest 

August 2ist. altogether, and about ten nixt day Clunes Cameron also joined 

them, and in the afternoon of the twenty first of August Clunes 

Cameron conducted them into a wood at the foot of Locharkaig, 

where they lay all night. 

22d. Early in the morning of the twenty second, an express was 

sent to Lochiel to desire his attendance. Here the P. stayed three 
days till the return of the express who brought word that Lochiel, 
being not yet recovered of his wounds, could not come at so great 
a distance, but he had sent his brother D r Cameron to make his 
apology, who arrived on the twenty fifth, and nixt day they all 
set out and travelled till they came to a wood opposite to Achna- 
cary, called Torvuilt, D r Cameron and Lochgarie having parted 
from the P. about three a clock in the afternoon, to avoid suspi- 
cion, as did Clunes Cameron, how soon he had conducted the P. 
to his quarters where he remained eight days, during which time 
the French gentlemen were sent for and introduced to H. R. H. 
and after staying two or three days, they were sent to a safe place, 
to be taken due care of till such time as they should get a safe 
passage into their own country. 



26th. 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. bf>\ 

\ 

The P. now seeing himself in a manner out of danger, and 
having got intelligence that the forces that were encamped at 
Fort Augustus were dispersed, and only Lord Loudon r s Highland 
regiment left at Fort Augustus, and the militia also having de- 
livered up all their arms were gone home, and supposing a chance 
party might come near where the P. was, he had a safe retreat 
either north or south, he now thought fit to dismiss Major M'do- 
nald (Glenaladale) to his own country to wait the coming of the 
French veshels on the coast, which H. R. H. expected every day, 
and resolved to remain himself in that place (unless he was sur- 
prised) and wait the event. 

Accordingly upon the third of September the Major set out September 3d. 
for his own country, leaving Lochgarie and Clunes Cameron 
with H. R. H. 

He arrived on the fifth and tarried in the country till the thir- r><\,. 
teenth, when Captain Sheridan and Lieutenant O'Bourn landed 
from on board two French veshels which had anchor'd at Loch- 
nanuagh in Arisaig, in order to carry off H. R. H, and coming to 
the place where the Major, or Glenaladale, was, expected to have 
found him with him ; whereupon the Major set out that very isth. 
night to acquaint the P. of the arrival of these French ships and 
to conduct him to the sea side ; but coming to the place, found 
he was gone, nor could he learn any thing about him to his great 
surprise. The P. had been oblidged to change his quarters upon 
hearing of a party of soldier's approach from Fort Augustus under 
the command of Mr. Monro of Culcairn and Captain Grant ; and 
Clunes Cameron, who was appointed to acquaint the Major of 
the P. being oblidged to retire, having himself gone out of the 
way, had left no notice for the Major either about the P. or him- 
self. This dissappointment at so critical a time gave the worthy 
Major great uneasiness ; yet while he was thus anxious and 
thoughlfull what to do, a poor woman came accidentally to the 
place where he was, and told him of Clunes being in a certain 

VOL. H. 4 c 



563 ACCOUNT OF THE YOUNG PRETENDER'S ESCAPE. 

sheeling, whom having found they concerted to send an express 
to the P. who by this time had gone to Lochiel. In the mean 
while the Major himself returned to the ships to acquaint them 
of the cause of the P 's delay and that he would be with them 
with all expedition. 

The P. being now informed that the French ships were in 
Lochnanuagh waiting for him, set out immediatly, accompanied 
by Lochiel, Lochgarie, John Roy Stewart &c. and going on board 
the Happy privateer of S 4 Maloes, she immediatly set sail the 
September twentieth of September, and escaping all the Government's war- 
ships and being in her way happily favoured by a fog, he ar- 
rived safely in France ; an unparalell'd instance, upon a review 
of all the circumstances of this escape, of a very particular Provi- 
dence interesting itself in his behalf. For what wise end Heaven 
has thus dissapointed and yet preserved this noble prince, and 
what future scenes the history of his life may display, time only 
can tell ; yet something very remarkable still seems waiting him 
and this poor country also. May God grant a happy issue. 



otms $retetrter tn jfrawe* 



otmg flrttentier in jfrance* 



An account of what happened to the young Pretender after 
his arrival in France, as related by persons at Paris in 
letters to their friends in Great Britain. 

These letters (a printed copy of which was found in the trunk 
containing the Lockhart papers) were published at London 
in 1749; but as they may not be generally known, the 
most interesting substance of their contents is here inserted 
by way of supplement to the young Pretender's adventures. 
-EDITOR. 

INTELLIGENCE was no sooner brought to Versailles that the 
young Chavalier de S* George was landed at Roscort near Mor- 
laix in Britanny on the twenty ninth of September 1746, than the 
Castle of S* Antoine was ordered to be prepared for his reception, 
and his brother accompanied by several young noblemen went 
to meet him, and conducted him directly to Versailles, he not 
chusing to stop at Paris for any refreshment. The King of 
France, Louis the fifteenth, immediately quitting the Council 
which was sitting on affairs of moment, went to receive him, 
and as he advanced, took him in his arms with every mark of 
tender affection, and said " Mon tres cher Prince, je rends grace 
au del qui me donne le plaisir extreme de vous voir arrive en 
bonne sante apres tant de fatigues et de dangers, Vous avezfait 
voir que toutes les grandes qualites des Heros et des Pfulosophes 



566 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

se trouvent unies en vous ; etj'espere qu'un de ces jours vous re- 
ceives la recompense d'un merite si extraordinaire" 

After a quarter of an hour's conversation with the King, the 
young Chevalier passed to the apartments of the Queen, who wel- 
comed him with every demonstration of good will and satisfac- 
tion ; and as he quitted the palace, the whole Court crowded 
about him to pay their compliments, and testified as much joy as 
if the Dauphin himself had been engaged in the same dangerous 
expedition and returned in safety. 

In spite of the reasons the French have given for their since- 
rity being called in question, and in spite of the events which 
have since happened to give the lye to all these kind professions, 
I cannot help thinking but that the King had really a very great 
personal regard for the young Chevalier, though the interest of 
his kingdom and the incessant remonstrances of his Ministers 
(some of whom it is suspected have other views besides the na- 
tional concerns) have prevented His Majesty from giving such 
proofs of that regard as the other expected and he made him 
hope. But however that may be, the sincerity of the Queen's 
professions admits of no doubt ; for Her Majesty and the Princess 
Sobieski had passed some years of their youth together and had 
contracted a most intimate and lasting friendship ; and it is na- 
tural to suppose that the favourite son of a person who had been 
so dear to her and who has so much the resemblance of his mo- 
ther, cannot be indifferent to her. It has been with a kind of 
maternal tenderness she has always looked upon him, and I have 
been told by several about Her Majesty, that whenever he came 
to court (which till the signing the peace he did once or twice 
every week) she used to keep him in conversation for whole 
hours together and make him recite to her and the Ladies who 
were with her, all his adventures, the detail of which seldom 
failed of drawing tears from her eyes ; nor were the young Prin- 
cesses, one of them especially, less affected with the melancholy 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 567 

story. This was sufficient to flatter a youthful heart, yet did lie 
not appear elevated with it ; the memory of his disappointment 
was yet too recent, and the news which was continually arriving 
of the commitments, trials and executions of some of his most 
faithful followers, filled him with an anxiety which left but little 
room for pleasurable ideas. 

The little visit he had made at Versailles being as it were incog, 
it was necessary he should pay his compliments in form and in 
the character his father had conferred upon him, which was that 
of Prince-Regent of England, Scotland and Ireland; accordingly 
about ten days after, he set out from the Castle of S* Antoine in 
the following manner. In the first coach were the Lords Ogih y 
and Elcho, the venerable Glenbucket and Mr. Kelly the young- 
Chevalier's secretary. In the second, were the young Chevalier 
himself, Lord Lewis Gordon, and the eldest Locheil as master of 
'*he horse ; two pages richly dressed lolled on the boot, and ten 
footmen in the livery of the character assumed by the young 
Chevalier, walked on each side. In the third coach were four 
gentlemen of his bed chamber, one of whom, called Captain 
Stafford, had some time since been a prisoner in Newgate, The 
young Locheil with several gentlemen followed on horseback, 
making a grand appearance altogether, but the young Chevalier 
himself took off my attention from every thing besides. I shall 
say nothing of his person, arid only tell you that lie did not en- 
tirely trust to the graces it received from nature for attracting 
admiration, for his dress had in it, I thought, somewhat of un- 
common elegance. His coat was rosecoloured velvet embroi- 
dered with silver and lined with silver tissue ; his waistcoat was 
a rich gold brocade, with a spangled fringe set on in scollops. 
The cockade in his hat, and the buckles of his shoes were dia- 
monds ; the George which he wore at his bosom, and the order 
of S* Andrew which he wore also tied by a piece of green rib- 
bon to one of the buttons of his waistcoat, were prodigiously 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

illustrated with large brilliants; in short he glittered all over like 
the star which they tell you appeared at his nativity. He sup- 
ped with the King, Queen and Royal family ; and all who at- 
tended him were magnificently entertained at the several tables 
appointed for them, according to the rank they held under him. 

I should not have mentioned these particulars, but to shew you, 
that the French Court took all imaginable pains to luH the young 
Chevalier into forgetfulnes of the breach of past promises, and 
pel's wade him that his concerns would now be taken into imme- 
diate consideration. 

And here it seems proper to mention that Cardinal Tenciin 
tv ho is known to be indebted for his elevation to the dignity he 
enjoys, to the interest and favour of the father of the young Che- 
valier, came frequently to the Castle of S 1 Antoine, to pay his 
compliments, as he said, to the son of a person to whom he was 
so highly obliged. In one of these visits, after many protesta- 
tions of the unfeigned zeal he had for the service of his illustrious 
family, he look occasion to hint that in spite of the present cir- 
cumstances, the Ministry might find some expedient to gratify 
him with the succours he demanded, provided that in case of a re- 
storation to the Crown of Great Britain, the kingdom of Ireland 
were yielded up and made a province to France, as an equivalent 
for the expence the Government must necessarily be at in such 
an undertaking. But scarcely had the Cardinal finished what 
he had to say, when the young Chevalier started from his seat, 
and not able to contain how much he was irritated, cryed out 
" Non, Monsieur le Cardinal, tout ou rien! point de partage!" 
These words he repeated several times, walking backwards and 
forwards in an agitation which was not usual to him. The Car- 
dinal perceiving how his proposal was received, begged he would 
make no mention of it to the King or Ministry, it being, he said, 
only a project of his own, which the love and regard he ever had 
for his illustrious house had put into his head; to which the 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN PRANCE. 56 ( J 

young Chevalier replied that he should not give himself the trou- 
ble even to think about it. Whether the Cardinal had any or- 
ders to make this proposal, or whether in reality it was no more 
than a scheme of his own, cannot be determined; but it is not 
unlikely that he might put such a notion into the Ministers heads 
with a view that if they had approved it, and the young Cheva- 
lier had consented, the primacy of Ireland, when in the hands of 
the French, might be added to his ecclesiastical benefices. 

Notwithstanding the successes of France upon the Continent, 
her losses by sea and the embarrassed state of her finances in- 
duced her to be solicitous for peace, in the negotiations for which 
at Aix la Chapelle in March 1748, the interests of the young 
Chevalier and all the promises made him by the French King 
and Ministry were so far from being remembered, that in one of 
the articles, the Crown of Great Britain was guaranteed to the 
House of Hanover, and that in another it was stipulated that the 
son of the unhappy person who lays claim to it should be obliged 
to quit the French dominions. 

When the negotiations were arrived at such forwardness that 
the peace was scarcely to be doubted, they who wished it most 
for the common good of their country, expressed much concern 
for the young Chevalier, easily foreseeing that upon the conclu- 
sion of it, he would be obliged to leave France, as his father had 
been; and most people expected to see him extremely dejected 
on the occasion, though some, who knew the greatness of his 
spirit, imagined lie would of himself leave the dominions of 
France before the preliminaries were signed. 

His conduct however shewed how mistaken were all these 
conjectures; whether it were that he was pleased at being no 
longer under the necessity of dissembling his sentiments with re- 
gard to the French Ministry, or that the force of his resolution 
set him above being concerned at what could befall him, I can- 
not pretend to say, but he appeared more lively and gay than 

VOL. IL 4 D 



570 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANUi. 

ever; he hired an extremely fine hotel on the Quay des Theatins* 
on purpose, as he said, to be near the Opera and other places of 
diversion at Paris, some one or other of which he now very sel- 
dom failed of frequenting every evening. Whenever any dis- 
course happened in his presence concerning the Congress which 
was soon to assemble at Aix la Chapelle, he seemed not to attend 
to any thing that was said, but either sang, or found some way 
of avoiding a reply. 

He did not immediately refrain from going to Versailles, Fon- 
tainebleau, Choisy, or other places frequented .by the Court, but 
it was observed that he neither went so often nor staid so long as 
he had been accustomed, and rather chose to avoid than seek a 
private conference with the King. 

The first public indication he gave how little he prized the 
future friendship of France, was to cause a great number of me- 
dals to be cast, with his head, and this inscription, Carolus Wdl- 
lice Princeps, and on the reverse, Britannia, and shipping, with 
this motto, Amor et spes Britanniee, Of these, some were of sil- 
ver, and others of copper, the latter of which he took care to have 
so distributed that few of any tolerable rank but had one of them. 
Every body was surprized at the device, and some knew not 
what to make of it; but they who considered that France was 
reduced to the condition of being glad of a peace, entirely by 
the bravery and successes of the English fleet, looked upon it as 
an insult; and the Ministry are said to have been so much offended 
at it that they complained to the King and pretended that some 
notice should be taken of it ; to which His Majesty replied that 
the P e doubtless had his reasons, but that whatever they were, 
as he could not be called to an account, nothing should be said 
on the occasion. 

This, however, made a very great noise, as the medals were 
dispersed over England, Scotland, and several parts of the Conti- 
nent, and the Prince de Conti, accounted one of the proudest 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN PRANCE. 571 

as well as the most witty men in France, shewed he was exces- 
sively piqued at the young Chevalier on this occasion ; for meet- 
ing 1 him one day in the Luxembourg gardens, he told him with 
an air of pleasantry, which had also somewhat of a sneer in it, 
that the device of his medals was not altogether so applicable, 
as the British navy were no very good friends to him ; to which, 
as I am credibly informed, the young Chevalier made this remark- 
able reply, " Cela est vrai, Prince, mais Je suis, nonobstant, 
/'am* de la Flotte contre tons ses ennemis, comme Je regardcrai 
toiijours la gloire d'Angleterre comme la mienne ; et sa gloire eat 
dans saflotte." The Prince de Corrti, unwilling to make a se- 
rious affair of it, said no more, but left him, to join some other 
company, to whom, it seems, he related what had passed, not 
without inveighing with some heat against the ingratitude, as 
he termed it, of the young Chevalier. 

Soon after the French plenipotentiaries set out for the Congress 
at Aix la Chapelle, the young Chevalier entered his protest there 
against all that should be concerted in prejudice to his title and 
pretensions. This, as it was a thing of form and had been done 
both by his father and grandfather on the assembling of every 
congress since the exclusion of the family, was no more than 
might be expected ; and the omitting it would indeed have been 
deemed a tacit relinquishing his claim. But in this protest there 
was something more remarkable than had been in any of those 
which preceded it; for the young Chevalier, after the usual de- 
claration, adds, " that whatever might be insinuated to the con- 
trary, he would never accept of any offers or enter into any con- 
ditions for giving up his claim, which he was determined to 
maintain by all the means Heaven should put in his power, 
and should reject all such proposals as the acceptance of must 
oblige him to abandon those who adhered to and depended on 
him." 

This latter part looked like a confirmation of some reports 



572 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

which I have not yet mentioned. It was whispered by several 
who pretended to be deep in the secrets of state, that there was 
a project on foot for compromising that affair which had for so 
many years divided the subjects of Great Britain, and that pro- 
posals had been made to the young Chevalier, that on renouncing 
for ever all claim to the Crown of Great Britain and Ireland, a 
perpetual yearly subsidy should be granted him from those 
kingdoms, sufficient to support the dignity of a Prince, which 
title should also be allowed him as a branch of the Sobieski line* 
Such proposals could not but greatly disgust the young Chevalier, 
and probably gave rise to that part of the protest which has just 
been quoted. 

After the signing the preliminaries at the close of April 174$, 
the young Chevalier went no more to Court, but appeared far 
from disconcerted at the event ; nor did the rejoicings that took 
place upon the occasion at Paris seem to give him the least shock ; 
he had determined to contemn his fate instead of complaining of 
its severity, and he kept his resolution to the end, even in the 
midst of the most shocking and unexpected trials. 

It was soon known all over Paris that by one of the articles of 
the treaty he would be obliged to quit France entirely; and also 
that the King being willing to soften the stroke as much as possi- 
ble, had written tathe States of Fribourg in Switzerland, desiring 
they would receive him in a manner becoming his birth and as 
a Prince who was very dear to him; but the young Chevalier, 
continuing to live as a person regardless of what was doing, the 
King ordered Cardinal Tencin to acquaint him with the necessity 
there was for his departure* 

It may be supposed that the Cardinal delivered this message 
in the tenderest terms that could be, and spared no arguments to 
convince him of the regret His most Christian Majesty felt at 
finding himself constrained, for the sake of giving peace to Eu- 
rope, to make a concession so. disagreeable to himself. He ia 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 573 

also said to have insinuated that it was only an expedient to serve 
a temporary purpose, and that in a short time the young Cheva- 
lier might return with a greater prospect of advantage than ever; 
to all which the latter gave short and evasive answers, so that 
the Cardinal was obliged to leave him without being able to give 
the King any positive account whether he was ready to conform 
to his intentions or not. The King having waited the result 
about a fortnight, and being informed that the young Chevalier 
had made no preparations for his departure, sent the Duke de 
Gesvres with a message of much the same nature with that deli- 
vered by the Cardinal; but this had no more effect than the for- 
mer, the young Chevalier only telling him that he had so little 
expected the step that had been taken that he had not yet had 
sufficient time to consider how to behave in it. This answer 
produced a delay of near a fortnight more, when the Duke de 
Gesvres was sent a second time; and on his expatiating on the 
necessity the King was under of executing this article of the 
treaty, the Chevalier replied with some warmth that there was a 
prior treaty between himself and His most Christian Majesty, 
from which he could not depart with honour. It was in vain 
the Duke urged him to be more explicit, the young Chevalier only 
bidding him deliver what he had said, to the King who would 
know his meaning. 

, Neither of these visits from the Duke, nor the purport of his 
errand, was made a secret either by the one side or the other; 
and there was so little appearance of the young Chevalier's in- 
tention to leave Paris, that his people bought several pieces of 
new furniture for his house. Among other things, he sent to the 
King's goldsmith, who had been employed by him before, and 
ordered him to make a service of plate to the value of an hundred 
thousand crowns, to be ready against a particular day, which 
the goldsmith promised not to fail in ; but it so happened that 
immediately after wards he received orders to prepare such a large 



574 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN PRANCE. 

quantity for the King's use against the same time, that he found 
it impossible to comply with both, upon which he waited on the 
young Chevalier and intreated he would allow him some days 
longer, telling him the reason ; but he would not admit of the 
excuse, insisting on being first served, as he had given the first 
orders. The goldsmith thought the most prudent way of extri- 
cating himself from this dilemma would be to acquaint the King, 
who no sooner heard this story, than he commanded that the 
young Chevalier should be first served, and that the value of the 
plate should be paid by the comptroller of the household. It is 
probable that the King imagined the hurry the young Chevalier 
shewed for having this plate got ready at a particular time, arose 
from his designing speedily to leave Paris, for not till a week 
after it had been delivered were any more messages sent to him. 
But it is plain that the young Chevalier had no such intention, 
but was resolved to push tilings to the last extremity; and I have 
been told that this fine service of plate was ordered for a gpand 
entertainment which he gave to the Princess Talmont a near re- 
lation to the Queen, the Marchioness of Sprimont, Madame de 
Maisieuse, the Duke de Bouvillion and above thirty others of the 
nobility of both sexes and several foreigners of distinction/ 

It was about this time, November 1748, that in consequence of 
the definitive treaty of peace which was signed the seventh of 
October, the Earl of Sussex and Lord Cathcart arrived at Paris 
as hostages from Great Britain for the due performance of the 
treaty on the part of that Government, a measure at which the 
young Chevalier expressed great dissatisfaction, and publicly 
said that the tables were sadly turned upon England, since her 
word could not be relied upon without such pledges as are scarce 
ever granted but by a conquered nation, whereas French faith 
passed current for all that was to be done on her part. 

The French Court having received repeated complaints from 
the English Ministry that the young Chevalier was not yet removed 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 575 

from Paris, thought proper once more to remind him of what 
was expected from him, and accordingly the Duke de Gesvres 
waited upon him a third time and acquainted him that the States 
of Fribourg had returned a most obliging answer to the King's 
letter on his account, and were ready to receive him with all the 
demonstrations of respect due to his birth and virtues, in their 
power to give. To this the young Chevalier .replied only, that 
he hoped to find a time to return the good will of the States; nor 
did he satisfy the Duke whether he accepted the offer or not. 
The King thereupon dispatched a courier to Rome with an ac- 
count of all that had passed ; and the young Chevalier having 
also written to his father, the Court was willing to await the re- 
sult, which occasioned further delay. 

-.<;As no part of these proceedings was a secret, scarcely any 
-thing else was talked of at Paris. For a P. in the circumstances 
^of the young Chevalier to thwart the intentions and disregard 
the power of such a monarch as the French King, would have 
seemed too strange to be accounted for, had not the flagrant 
injustice :done him, and the high idea every one had of the 
greatness of his mind, diminished the wonder and justified the 
resentment ; and I may venture to say that among the body of 
the French people, taking in all degrees, for one that blamed his 
conduct in this point, there were more than a hundred that ap- 
plauded it. Whenever the young Chevalier appeared in any of 
the public walks at Paris, all the company followed the path he 
took, as impelled by irresistible attraction. When he came to 
the theatres, the attention of the audience was fixed upon him, 
regardless of what was presented upon the stage ; upon his en- 
trance into a box, a general whisper in his favour ran from one 
side of the theatre to the other, and few of the fair sex but let fall 
tears of mingled pity and admiration ; while he alone seemed 
above a sense of his misfortunes, and talked to the young nobi- 
lity with whom he was perpetually surrounded, in the same easy, 



576 THE YOUNG PRETENTER IN PRANCE. 

chcarful and affable manner he had always done. The magna- 
nimity with which he supported this last stroke which was looked 
upon as so fatal to his hopes, was now the general topic of eulo- 
gium in all places, and the Princess Tahnont spoke so largely of 
it, even in the King's presence, that she was forbid the Court; 
and several other great personages were highly in disgrace on 
the same account. 

The French ministers being now fully convinced that it would 
be impossible for them to make any future use of the young Che- 
valier in their schemes for distressing England, wished for no- 
thing more than his destruction, and took this opportunity of re- 
presenting to the King that His Majesty had been too passive in 
this affair, and that he had suffered himself to be affronted in his 
own dominions, his authority to be called in question, and the af- 
fections of his subjects to be alienated in favour of a stranger, 
and they urged that somewhat ought to be done to humble the 
pride, as they termed it, of the young Chevalier, adding that it 
would be too great a condescension to wait the return of the 
courier from Rome. These representations induced the King to 
send the Duke de Gesvres a fourth time to him to insist on his im- 
mediate removal. The young Chevalier now expressed some im- 
patience, and told the Duke that though he should always treat 
with respect any one who came to him from the King, yet he was 
sorry to find he had the trouble of so often repeating a message 
to which he could give no ear, without hearing it from the King 
himself. The Duke having replied that such a thing was impos- 
sible, as H. R. H. went not to Court, and it could not be expected 
that His Majesty would come to the Quay des Theatins in person, 
" Enfin done, Monsieur le Due" exclaimed the young Chevalier, 
" Je n'ai plus rien a dire que ce quej'ai deja dit Pardonnez moi, 
" J'ai quelqiies affaires," and with these words quitted the room, 
leaving the Duke in the greatest consternation. 

The King however being impatient to get rid of the young 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 677 

Chevalier at any rate, and yet loth to proceed to extremities, 
vouchsafed now to write him a letter with his own hand, and 
sent with it a blank order to be filled up by the young Cheva- 
lier, for what yearly sum he pleased ; both which the Duke de 
Gesvres was obliged to deliver, though he has since declared he 
would gladly have been excused. The young Chevalier read the 
letter twice over, and having paused a little, threw the order from 
him with disdain, saying that he neither wanted nor would re- 
ceive any favours of that kind from His most Christian Majesty, 
and that as for the rest, what was required of him was not con- 
sistent with honour. Whether he meaned his own honour or 
that of the King is uncertain, but he would explain himself no 
further, and this was all that the King's condescension produced. 

This proceeding on the part of the young Chevalier both per- 
plexed and exasperated the King, and a council being call- 
ed upon it, it was there resolved that the Count de Maurepas, 
who had always maintained a good understanding with the 
young Chevalier, should go and expostulate with him, nor leave 
him till he had obliged him to declare in express terms what was 
his intention, and withal to intimate to him that if he did not 
conform to the present necessity of affairs by leaving the king- 
dom with a good grace, the Ministers would be forced to com- 
pel him to it, in order to fulfill their engagements with Great 
Britain. " Les ministres ! les ministres /" cried the young Cheva- 
lier with the greatest disdain, " si vous voulez rn'obliger, Monsieur 
le Comte, dites au Roi votre maitre que Je suis ne pour rompre 
torn les projcts de ses ministres." This was plainly setting them 
at defiance, and might be expected to be attended by no less con- 
sequences than the utmost of their malice could contrive to bring 
about ; but the young Chevalier shewed himself as incapable of 
fear as he was above dissimulation, and having nothing to hope 
from their friendship, he despised their resentment. 

You surprize me much by telling me it is reported in England 

VOL. II. 4 E 



578 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

that on the arrival of the hostages the young Chevalier concealed 
himself in the house of some friends, in order to have it believed 
that he had quitted Paris ; than which I can aver on my own 
knowledge, nothing can be more false ; and he was so far from 
endeavouring to avoid those noble Lords, that he sought an op- 
portunity of having^ome discourse with them, but the caution 
observed by the Marquis de Puysieux prevented him from ever 
meeting them. The subject on which he perhaps intended to 
have entertained them might not indeed have been very agreeable 
to the French court ; for though to preserve an entire command 
over all his passions is a distinguished part of his character, the 
indignation he conceived on hearing that these Lords were ar- 
rived was so great, that without any regard to who might hear 
him, he said, " Shameful concession, unworthy of a Ministry 
not abandoned to all sense of honour and virtue! but if ever I 
mount the throne of my ancestors, Europe shall see me use my 
utmost endeavours to force France in her turn to send hostages 
to England." This I am assured he said, from the best authority 
1 could have except his own. 

The courier being at length returned from Rome, brought a let- 
ter from the old Chevalier to his son, inclosed in one to the King, 
open, as it is said, for His Majesty's perusal. I wish I could 
oblige you with the contents; but though many pretended copies 
are handed about, they are so widely different from each other 
in the most material passages that it is impossible to kn6w' which 
of them is genuine or if any one is so ; all that I ca,n say is that 
a gentleman, who was near the young Chevalier's person and is 
still at Paris, assures me that the original contained a command 
to him to quit the French territories, but without mentioning 
any time in which he should obey ; for which reason he thought 
himself at liberty to stay where he was till he had fixed on a 
proper place for his future residence, as he had some reluctance 
to go to Fribourg, though he had no other objection than because 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 579 

lie should be looked upon as a guest recommended by France, 
to whom, he frequently said with some warmth, rather than be 
obliged, he would suffer any thing. 

The Ministry imagining he would pay as little regard to his 
father's injunctions as he had done to their remonstrances, now 
pressed the King to give orders for his being arrested and con- 
ducted by force out of the kingdom, to which His Majesty, seeing 
no other means of complying with the treaty, at last consented, 
though, being in the Queen's apartments when the order was 
brought for his signature, he, as I am well informed, burst into 
this pathetic exclamation " Pauvi'e Prince ! qu'il est difficile 
pour vn Roy d'etre un veritable ami!" 

This order, signed only at three o'clock in the afternoon of 
Monday the tenth of December, 1748, being blazed all over Paris 
in the evening, a gentleman of the young Chevalier's retinue 
heard and gave him intelligence of it; but he was so far from 
believing it that he cried somewhat hastily, " Pish pish an 
idle rumour ! They know I will obey my father." 

The Ministry resolving to have the young Chevalier seized by 
surprize, the passage leading to the Opera-house in the Palais 
Royal was chosen as the most proper place ; and orders being 
given to the Duke de Biron, colonel of the French guards, a 
council of war was held at his house on the Monday night, and 
was composed of the field-officers and six Serjeants. Having con- 
certed the measures for executing their orders, the officers who 
were to have a share in it were commanded to repair to Monsieur 
de VaudreuiPs, Major in the Guards, on Tuesday morning before 
day, in order to prevent their being perceived, and the Duke de 
Biron caused ten ells of crimson silk cord to be procured for the 
purpose of binding their intended prisoner. In the course of 
Tuesday the eleventh of December, the Duke ordered twelve 
hundred men of his regiment to invest the Palais Royal ; the ser- 
jeants of the regiment, -armed with cuirasses and scull-caps, had 

1E2 



580 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

directions to be in the passage to the Opera-house and in the 
entrances of the houses bordering upon it ; the Serjeants of gre- 
nadiers were ordered to seize the young Chevalier ; two coin- 
panics of grenadiers took post in the courtyard of the kitchens, 
where the Duke de Biron, disguised and in a coach, waited to 
see the success of the enterprize ; the mousquetaires had orders to 
be ready to mount on horseback ; the guet (or armed police) was 
distributed in all the neighbouring streets ; troops were posted 
upon the road from the Palais Royal to Vincennes ; hatchets 
and scaling ladders were prepared and locksmiths were directed 
to attend in order to take the young Chevalier by escalade in case 
he should throw himself into some house and there resolve to 
stand a siege ; and finally Doctor Vernage a physician, and three 
surgeons were ordered to be in readiness to dress the wounded. 

These measures being observed, the young Chevalier received 
several notes giving him advice of the design. At the Tuilleries 
likewise he was informed of it ; and as he passed through the 
street Saint Honore, in his way to the Opera, he heard a voice - 
" Prince, return, they are going to arrest you, the Palais Royal 
is beset." Notwithstanding these warnings he proceeded, and 
in alighting from his coach at the passage of the Opera-house he 
found the guards doubled, with their bayonets fixed, and the guet 
turning passengers out of the streets and making the coaches 
file off; and he was surrounded by six Serjeants dressed in grey 
cloaths, as if they had been servants desirous to get a sight of 
him, a popular curiosity to which he had been much accustomed. 
A serjeant in uniform now advanced, under pretence of dispersing 
the mob, which was the signal agreed upon, and at that instant 
two Serjeants seized him by the arms behind, two confined his 
hands, one clasped him round the middle, and another seized 
his legs. In this condition they conveyed him to a great gate, at 
the end of the passage, belonging to Monsieur de Matsar, which 
opened into the courtyard of the kitchens, and Monsieur de Vau- 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 581 

dreuil, who with the other officers waited for him behind the gate, 
which they opened to receive him, said, " I arrest you in the 
name of the King my master:" to which the young Chevalier, 
without the least change in his countenance, answered, " The 
manner is a little too violent." He was then carried into a room 
upon the groxind-floor, and being ordered to give up his arms, 
he replied, " I shall not deliver them to you, but you may take 
them :" and then they took from him his sword, a knife with two 
blades, and a brace of pistols. " You must not be surprized," 
he said, " at seeing me with pistols, having constantly carried 
them ever since I returned from Scotland." Monsieur de Vau- 
dreuil intreating him not to make any attempt either upon his 
own life or that of any other person, he gave him his word that 
he would not. Monsieur de Vaudreuil then went to the Duke 
de Biron's coach to give an account of what had passed, and in- 
formed him of the young Chevalier's being disarmed without re- 
sistance ; but the Duke judging that for greater security he should 
be bound, the order to that effect was executed in the presence 
of M. de Vaudreuil, who made his excuses to the young Che- 
valier, by assuring him that these precautions were taken from 
regard to his person and solely to prevent him from making any 
attempt upon himself. " I am not used to such proceedings,'' 
was the reply ; " and I shall not say whether they are justifiable 
or not ; but the disgrace cannot affect me, it can only affect your 
master." To M. de Vaudreuil's declarations how much he was 
chagrined at having such a commission to execute ; the young 
Chevalier replied, " It is very mortifying for an officer." Both 
his arms and legs were tied, and he was bound with so many 
cords that looking disdainfully upon them, he asked " Have you 
not enough now?" and M. de Vaudreuil answering " Not yet," 
the young Chevalier darted at him a menacing look. This ope- 
ration being terminated, he was put into a hired coach that 
waited in the courtyard of Hie kitchens, M. de Vaudreuil placing 



582 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

himself by his side, and two captains opposite to them, whilst 
two officers on horseback rode with a hand upon the door on 
each side of the coach, six grenadiers with fixed bayonets 
mounted behind, and the rest of the soldiers on foot surrounded 
the coach. They then proceeded towards the suburb of Saint 
Antoine, and the Duke de Biron, after seeing them set out, step- 
ped from his coach into his chair, and went to give an account 
of the transaction to the King. 

The coach stopping in the suburb of Saint Antoine where a 
detachment of mousquetaires waited for it and where fresh horses 
were put to the coach, the young Chevalier, seeing these prepa- 
rations, asked if they were conveying him to Hanover, to which 
M. de Vaudreuil replied that they had changed horses in order 
not to be kept too long upon the road. Nothing more was said 
during their route to Vincennes, where the Marquis de Chatelet, 
who was known to and beloved by the young Chevalier, and who 
had just received orders concerning him, no sooner appeared, 
than the latter exclaimed, " I should be glad to embrace you; 
come to me, my friend, you see I cannot go to you." M. de Cha- 
telet perceiving, he was bound, cried out with horror, and run- 
ning to him, caused him to be unbound, and assisted in doing 
so, trembling and scarcely able to support himself. " Come, 
come, my friend," said the prisoner, encouraging him, as he 
walked up the stairs (consisting of fifty steps) to the chamber 
appointed for his lodging. Upon entering and coolly surveying 
his apartment, the furniture of which consisted of a matted chair 
and a wretched camp-bed, " This," said he, " is not very magni- 
ficent:" and having enquired the meaning of certain characters 
he observed upon the walls of the room, M. de Chatelet told him 
they were the handy-work of a priest .who had made a long abode 
in that chamber. M. de Vaudreuil saying that the young Che- 
valier had not been thoroughly searched, M. de Chatelet asked 
him if he. ha4,any thing remaining with which lie could make 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 583 

any attempt upon himself; whereupon he gave them a pair of 
compasses, and declared upon his word that he had nothing more; 
but M. de Vaudreuil took M. de Chatelet aside, and after whis- 
pering some time together they returned and searched him so 
strictly that M. de Vaudreuil thrust his hands into the most se- 
cret part of his garments, and found a pocket-book which he took 
from him; the young Chevalier shewing on his countenance 
marks of great indignation, but not uttering a word. 

After this, M. de Chatelet having observed that the chamber 
being very small, his prisoner could not take a walk in it, and 
that having been accustomed to a great deal of exercise, the 
being inclosed in such a little room might be prejudicial to his 
health, the young Chevalier replied, " Instead of taking one turn, 
I shall take four." M. de Chatelet then told him there was, next 
to that, a large room, the door of which should be opened, if he 
would give his word but the young Chevalier interrupted him 
by saving " I shall not give my word; I have given it once al- 
ready, and it was not taken; I shall therefore give it no more." 
" I am undone," cried M. de Chatelet, falling at his feet and 
pouring forth a flood of tears, " Monseigneur, this is the most 
unfortunate day of my whole life :" upon which the young Che- 
valier with great tenderness gave him his hand and said, " I 
know your friendship for me; I shall never confound the friend 
with the governor; do the duties of your office." 

Being asked at what*hour he would sup, he answered that he 
had dined heartily, and very late, and that he would call for 
something when he had a mind to eat. He then enquired how 
they had treated the gentlemen his attendants ; " Have you," he 
said, " bound my Englishmen as you did me? An Englishman is 
not used to be bound ; he is not made for that purpose." He soon 
afterwards resumed the discourse about his people : " If you 
have treated the Chevalier Harrington in the same manner you 
treated me, I heartily pity the poor man ; he is fat and must have 



584 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

suffered a great deal." At last finding they refused to give him 
any account of the fate of his people, he spoke no more, but 
walked about his chamber, treating the officers appointed for his 
giiard with familiarity and politeness, M. de Vaudreuil being the 
only person to whom he did not direct his discourse. After 
walking a long time he threw himself upon the bed, in his cloaths, 
but it was with difficulty he could compose himself; at last how- 
ever he fell asleep, but his slumbers were so disturbed that the 
officers of his guard being frightened, ran to his bedside, where 
they found him still fast asleep. He continued sleeping till six 
in the morning, when he awoke, and having asked what it was 
o'clock and being told, he with a smile said " The nights seem 
here to be somewhat long." He then arose, and walked about 
his chamber, talking freely jwith the officers about indifferent 
matters, and treating them as if they belonged to himself. 

This account I had from an officer of my acquaintance who 
was one of the young Chevalier's guards, was with Monsieur de 
Vaudreuil behind the gate at the bottom of the Opera-house pas- 
sage, saw the young Chevalier brought in, conducted him to Vin- 
cennes, and did not leave him till next morning. He would at first 
have denied that the young Chevalier had been bound; but find- 
ing the fact was made public, he with grief acknowledged it. He 
had conceived the highest respect for the unfortunate stranger 
and was struck with admiration at his conduct, adding that in 
his greatest distress he did not discover the least weakness that 
in his conversation he shewed as much temper and magnanimity 
as any man could shew in the height of prosperity, and that even 
in his prison he appeared the monarch of the universe. Both 
officers and soldiers upon their return from Vincennes declared 
the same sentiments, and thought it their duty not to conceal 
their admiration ; and in less than four hours all these circum- 
stances were spread over the whole city of Paris, where the young 
Chevalier was beloved, his virtues respected, and all thought he 



THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 585 

had merited an asylum in France. The public, already in con- 
sternation on hearing of his arrest, shewed the utmost indigna- 
tion at the treatment he had received, and discoursed upon it 
without restraint in such terms that it was thought necessary to 
give some pretended reasons for binding the young Chevalier and 
for the other parts of the treatment he had met with. The officers 
were reprimanded for having so much extolled him, and were 
ordered to say that he had attempted to throw himself out of the 
coach, and that they had bound him because after he had de- 
livered up one pistol and given his word that he had no more, they 
had nevertheless found another. But these stories came too late; 
the officers could not now contradict facts which they themselves 
had publicly related ; besides, all of them, except one or two, re- 
fused obedience to this order, and continued to speak with admi- 
ration of the young Chevalier. But what I should deem incre- 
dible had I not received it from some persons of the first quality, 
who were present, is that the morning after the arrest, the Dau- 
phin went to the royal apartments and in the full levee took the 
liberty of condemning the step that had been taken, with a ve- 
hemence, which however just, was thought too presuming. He 
said that he was both surprized and grieved His Majesty had 
been prevailed upon to give the royal sanction to an act which 
fixed an indelible stain upon the glory of France that all Eu- 
rope would despise the barbarous policy of a Court which shewed 
no regard either to its own engagements or the blood and vir- 
tues of the person thus ill dealt with that the Ministers who 
yielded that such an article should be inserted in the treaty and 
advised the execution of it, ought to be looked upon as the be- 
trayers of His Majesty's honour and that of their country and 
that in saying this he spoke not only his own sense but that of the 
whole nation. A remonstrance so stinging from the mouth of 
a son, could not but highly irritate a King and a father; yet 
did His Majesty at first content himself with telling the Dau- 

VOL. II. 4 F 



586 THE YOUNG PRETENDER IN FRANCE. 

phin that he was too young to give his judgement in affairs of 
that nice and delicate nature ; but finding him persist in inveigh- 
ing against all the measures that had been taken with regard to 
the young Chevalier, the King grew warmer, and such high 
words arose between them that the princes of the blood and the 
nobility present were in the utmost consternation, and withdrew 
one by one, not chusing to witness a dispute in which none 
dared to interpose. 

I have further to acquaint you that no sooner was the word 
given that the young Chevalier was arrested than another party 
of guards seized upon his house, turned out the inferior servants, 
clapped all the gentlemen of his retinue into the Bastille, and 
put the broad seal upon his effects, though they will doubtless be 
sent after him when it is known where he has fixed his residence. 

The young Chevalier continued a close prisoner at Vincennes 
until the Sunday after his arrest, when he was conducted to Pont 
Beauvoisin the frontier town of France and Savoy, from whence 
he proceeded to Chambery ; and having passed three clays there 
and written a variety of letters, he travelled to Avignon in order 
to meet Don Philip of Spain with whom he passed about a week, 
but whether he intends to remain there is quite uncertain. His 
gentlemen were set at liberty on the return of the officers who 
had escorted him to the frontiers, and it is supposed they will fol- 
low him when the place of his retirement is ascertained. 



THE END. 



PRINTED BY RICHARD AND ARTHUR TAYLOR, SHOE LANE. 




Lockh&rt, George 

The Lockh&rt pepers 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



